1. A 65-year-old female patient diagnosed with bronchial asthma suddenly developed a worsening of her general condition, developed expiratory dyspnea, cough with vitreous sputum, and acrocyanosis. What pre-hospital care should be provided to the patient?
a. Administer 30 mg of prednisolone intravenously
b. Inject 0.5 ml of 0.182% adrenaline solution IM
*c. Inhale with salbutamol
d. Perform tracheal intubation
e. Administer 5 ml of 2% Euphyllin solution intravenously
 
2. A child was bitten by a stray dog on the street. What measures should be taken to provide emergency care to the child?
*a. Thoroughly wash the bite wound with soapy water
b. Calm the child, administer painkillers
c. Apply a hemostatic dressing to the wound
d. Treat the wound with an antiseptic
e. Apply an aseptic dressing to the wound
 
3. Immediately after giving birth, the woman in labor developed profuse bleeding from the genital tract and symptoms of hypovolemia began to develop rapidly. Objectively observed: pulse - 120/min, blood pressure - 90/50 mm Hg. art., tachypnea, cold sweat, pale skin. Algover index (shock) - 1.3. Specify the volume of blood loss (in % of BCC).
a. 20%
*b. 30%
c. 10%
d. 15%
e. 50%
 
4. Indicate the type of conflict that arises between a specific person and their organization when their actions are interdependent and the choices of one party affect the results of the other.
a. Interpersonal
*b. Intragroup
c. Administrative
d. Intergroup
e. Intrapersonal
 
5. A 73-year-old man complains of shortness of breath and palpitations that occur during minor physical exertion, cough and feeling of lack of air in a horizontal position, swelling of the lower extremities, increased abdominal volume. Objectively observed: diffuse cyanosis, persistent swelling of the lower extremities, ascites. Auscultation: in the lower parts of both lungs, vesicular breathing is significantly weakened, silent small-bubble rales, heart rate - 26/min. Heart sounds are weakened, systolic murmur at the apex of the heart and aorta. BP - 112/62 mm Hg. Art., pulse - 94/min. For which stage of chronic heart failure are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. And
b. -
c. IIA
d. II
*e. IIB
 
6. A 72-year-old female patient suddenly developed vomiting of "coffee grounds" and dizziness. History: peptic ulcer. Objectively observed: pale skin, cold sticky sweat, blood pressure - 90/70 mm Hg. Art., pulse - 112/min, melena. What complication of the underlying disease has the patient developed?
a. Penetration
b. Pyloric stenosis
c. Perforation
*d. Bleeding
e. Peritonitis
 
7. A 26-year-old patient, in whose presence a nurse was giving an injection to another patient, complained of weakness, dizziness, and suddenly fainted. What measures should be taken to begin emergency care in this case?
a. Apply heating pads to the extremities
b. Give an injection of cordiamine
c. Provide a sitting position
d. Apply an ice pack to the back of the head
*e. Provide a horizontal position with raised lower limbs
 
8. Which branch of pharmacology studies the patterns of absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of drugs?
*a. Pharmacokinetics
b. Pharmacogenetics
c. Pharmacognosy
d. Pharmacotherapy
e. Pharmacodynamics
 
9. A 56-year-old patient has been suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for 10 years. During the examination, an increase in the anterior-posterior size of the chest was found, its excursion was reduced, and the course of the ribs was horizontal. Specify the shape of the patient's chest.
a. Conical
b. Asthenic
c. Paralytic
d. Hypersthenic
*e. Barrel-shaped
 
10. In which type of management are management decisions competent, but the management process is divided into separate functions?
a. Line-staff
*b. Functional
c. Linear
d. Matrix
e. Divisional
 
11. A 50-year-old patient with open mechanical injury to the upper limb in the hand area has venous bleeding. What emergency care measure should be applied first?
a. Administer painkillers
*b. Apply a pressure bandage to the wound
c. Apply cold to the injury site
d. Provide psychological support
e. Immobilize the injured limb
 
12. For fractional curettage of the uterine cavity, the nurse has prepared: gynecological speculum, forceps, curette, uterine probe, sterile diaper. What other tools need to be prepared?
*a. Ball nose pliers
b. Brown's syringe
c. Needle holder
d. Conchotom
e. Scalpel
 
13. A 44-year-old woman is unconscious. According to relatives, the woman has type 1 diabetes, and before losing consciousness she experienced dizziness, anxiety, a feeling of extreme hunger and fear, and impaired coordination of movements. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, excessively moist, pulse - 94/min, blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg. What drug should be used first to provide emergency care to the patient?
a. 5% glucose solution
b. Short-acting insulin
c. 0.1% adrenaline solution
d. Long-acting insulin
*e. 40% glucose solution
 
14. A ten-year-old child with type 1 diabetes suddenly develops hunger, tremors, sweating, incoordination, and loss of consciousness. What is the first parenteral drug to be administered to the child for emergency care?
a. 2% papaverine solution
b. 1% diphenhydramine solution
c. 25% magnesium sulfate solution
*d. 40% glucose solution
e. 10% calcium gluconate solution
 
15. Which variant of female infertility is characterized by the detection of specific isoantibodies to sperm in the woman's vagina?
a. Endocrine
b. Uterine
c. Tube-peritoneal
*d. Immunological
e. Psychogenic
 
16. A 29-year-old woman complains of itching and burning in the area of the external genitalia, vaginal discomfort, which increases during sexual intercourse. The results of a gynecological examination: the vaginal mucosa is hyperemic, swollen, petechial hemorrhages on the mucous membrane of the vaginal part of the cervix ("strawberry" cervix), vaginal discharge is foamy, gray-yellow in color, with an unpleasant odor. For which disease are these symptoms characteristic?
*a. Trichomoniasis
b. Bacterial vaginosis
c. Chlamydia
d. Aerobic vaginitis
e. Candidal vulvovaginitis
 
17. Indicate an important problem in the development of management practice in Ukraine.
a. Ignorance of entrepreneurs
b. High economic performance
*c. Insufficient development of the organization's modern culture
d. Corruption
e. Create a culture of innovation
 
18. A patient in an infectious disease hospital was diagnosed with diphtheria of the oropharynx and was given anti-diphtheria serum for treatment. What is its main effect?
a. Destruction of the infectious agent
b. Providing a sedative effect
c. Stimulation of the immune system
*d. Neutralization of the toxin
e. Stabilization of hemodynamics
 
19. How many interconnected stages (phases) are there in the structure of the organizational management process?
*a. 5
b. 3
p. 7
d. 6
e. 4
 
20. A 21-year-old woman was hospitalized in the maternity ward at 38-39 weeks of pregnancy. She was not observed in the antenatal clinic. Positive HBsAg was detected in the patient's blood. Indicate the type of transmission of this infection from mother to child.
a. Parenteral
b. Transmissive
c. Aerosol
d. Contact
*e. Vertical
 
21. At the AIDS center, an HIV-infected patient was provided with information about the ways of transmission of the infection and the risk of infection of people from his environment. The patient was warned about the responsibility for non-compliance with sanitary and anti-epidemic rules and norms and infection of other people, and a corresponding entry was made in the medical document. Who should sign the corresponding entry in the patient's medical document?
*a. The supervising physician, the patient or his/her legal representative
b. Chief physician, head of department, supervising physician
c. -
d. Supervising physician, head of department, nurse
e. Head of department, legal representative of the patient
 
22. Specify a set of measures aimed at destroying insects and other arthropods that may be carriers of infectious diseases.
*a. Disinsection
b. Deratization
c. Current disinfection
d. Sterilization
e. Final disinfection
 
23. What type of medical care involves consultation with a general practitioner (family doctor), diagnosis and treatment of the most common diseases, referral of the patient for specialized care, and preventive measures?
a. Highly specialized
*b. Primary
c. Specialized
d. Emergency
e. Palliative
 
24. The activities of managers are aimed at managing people to achieve specific results. There are several main areas of self-development of a manager that can help him improve his abilities and qualities. Indicate the main areas of self-development of a manager.
a. Human resource development
*b. Self-observation, self-assessment and interpretation of the information received
c. Learning the principles of effective leadership
d. Using analytical approaches to problem solving
e. Use of social networks
 
25. What management principle does a senior nurse violate if, while working in a team, she ignores the opinions of other employees, discredits them in the eyes of patients, imposes her opinion, and makes decisions alone, without consulting her superiors?
a. Analytical skills
b. Reflexivity
*c. Collegiality
d. Systematicity
e. Transparency
 
26. Justify the purpose of prescribing cyanocobalamin in case of hyperchromic (megaloblastic) anemia.
*a. Stimulates erythropoiesis
b. Increases blood clotting
c. Stimulates leukopoiesis
d. Exhibits anticoagulant properties
e. Exhibits antiplatelet properties
 
27. A patient in the hematology department has a preliminary diagnosis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Indicate the most characteristic objective clinical sign of this disease.
a. Arthralgia
*b. Lymphadenopathy
c. Jaundice
d. Anasarca
e. Hemarthrosis
 
28. The main form of nursing communication is communication between a nurse and a patient, the success of which depends on certain criteria of effective communication. Indicate the main criteria of interpersonal communication.
a. The emergence of communication barriers
b. Passivity of communication participants
c. Lack of a common communicative space
d. The incorrectness of the interlocutor's opinion and the appropriate reaction to it
*e. Formation, reception, processing of information and development of relationships
 
29. A patient has developed the following symptoms as a result of organophosphorus poisoning: salivation, hyperhidrosis (increased sweating), bronchospasm, lacrimation, spastic abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, dizziness, mydriasis, bradycardia. What medications should be included in pathogenetic therapy?
a. Acetylcysteine and methionine
b. Calcium gluconate and ethanol
*c. Atropine sulfate and dipyroxime
d. Sodium thiosulfate and sodium nitrite
e. Glucagon and naloxone
 
30. Specify the type of state-guaranteed, accessible social primary medical and preventive care for the population, which includes a doctor's consultation, simple diagnostics and treatment of the most common diseases, injuries and poisonings, preventive measures, and referral of the patient for specialized and highly specialized care.
a. Emergency (fast)
b. Medical rehabilitation
c. Sanitary and epidemiological
*d. Primary health care
e. Secondary treatment and prevention
 
31. A child born with a body weight of 5200 g has objectively observed: dense edema on the back surfaces of the hands and feet, facial edema, half-open mouth, enlarged tongue and lips, rough, low-pitched voice when crying, slowness of movements and reflexes, late passage of meconium. Specify the main drug that will be used to treat this child.
a. Potassium iodide (iodomarin)
*b. Levothyroxine (L-thyroxine)
c. Hydrocortisone
d. Prednisolone
e. Seduxen (diazepam)
 
32. What immunobiological drug is used to vaccinate newborns against tuberculosis?
a. MMR vaccine
*b. BCG vaccine
c. Tetanus toxoid
d. DTP vaccine
e. Diphtheria-tetanus toxoid
 
33. A 46-year-old female patient complains of constant pain in the heart area, shortness of breath, and heart failure. Preliminary diagnosis: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Which diagnostic method is the most informative for clarifying the diagnosis?
a. Echocardiography
b. Coronary angiography
c. Electrocardiography
d. Cycle ergometry
*e. Chest X-ray
 
34. A full-term newborn child has had bloody stools (melena), nosebleeds, umbilical bleeding, and skin hemorrhages since the 3rd day of life. Which vitamin deficiency is most likely to have developed in the child?
a. A
b. C
*c. K
d. B_6
e. D
 
35. Specify a medical facility that provides medical care in many medical specialties within the facility and at home.
a. Blood transfusion station
b. Sanitary station
*c. Polyclinic
d. Hospice
e. Perinatal center
 
36. A four-year-old child has: fever, severe headache, repeated vomiting, hyperesthesia to all types of stimuli, rigidity of the occipital muscles, positive Brudzinski and Kernig signs. What additional diagnostic examination should be performed on the child in this case?
a. Rheoencephalography
b. Dopplerography of cerebral vessels
c. Computed tomography of the head
d. Electroencephalography
*e. Lumbar puncture
 
37. Name the type of arthritis that is often accompanied by nephrolithiasis.
a. Rheumatoid
b. Psoriatic
c. Septic
d. Osteoarthritis
*e. Gouty
 
38. Name a method of contraception whose disadvantages are irreversibility and lack of protection against sexually transmitted diseases.
a. Natural family planning methods
b. Spermicides
*c. Voluntary surgical sterilization
d. Hormonal contraception
e. Intrauterine contraception
 
39. A 46-year-old female patient complains of rumbling and a feeling of fullness in the abdomen, bloating, frequent shiny, grayish-colored stools up to 3-4 times a day with undigested food, progressive weight loss. During the examination, signs of polyhypovitaminosis were found. A preliminary diagnosis was made: exocrine pancreatic insufficiency syndrome. Which of the following laboratory tests is the most informative for confirming the diagnosis?
a. Lipid profile
b. Coagulogram
c. Proteogram
d. Ionogram
*e. Coprogram
 
40. A woman in her 30th week of pregnancy has the following changes in blood parameters: hemolysis of erythrocytes, increased activity of aminotransferases, decreased fibrinogen concentration, and thrombocytopenia. What pathological condition are these laboratory signs characteristic of?
a. Severe preeclampsia
*b. HELLP syndrome
c. Moderate preeclampsia
d. Combined preeclampsia
e. Eclampsia
 
41. A 43-year-old patient has been previously diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia. What set of symptoms is typical for this disease?
*a. Pale skin with a greenish tint, dry and thin skin, taste distortion, "geographic tongue"
b. Pale skin, bleeding of mucous membranes (gums), fever not related to infection, enlarged lymph nodes
c. Pale skin with a lemon tint, icteric sclerae, splenomegaly, glossitis, sensory disturbances, paresthesias
d. Pale skin, stellate hemorrhagic rashes, sometimes with skin necrosis, fever, sore throat
e. Pale skin, enlarged lymph nodes, fever, hepatosplenomegaly
 
42. To what type of documents does the regulation apply?
a. Financial and settlement
*b. Organizational
c. Informational
d. Administrative
e. Mandatory
 
43. A 34-year-old woman is in her 35th week of pregnancy. Due to the diagnosis of severe preeclampsia, she was hospitalized to the regional perinatal center. The woman was provided with emergency care, her condition stabilized. How quickly should the woman deliver in this case?
a. Immediately
b. Within 2-3 hours
c. Within the next 24 hours
d. Within the next 72 hours
*e. Within the next 48 hours
 
44. Nephrotic syndrome is a clinical and laboratory symptom complex that can develop as a result of kidney diseases or certain extrarenal pathologies. An increase in the level of which biochemical indicator in the blood may indicate the beginning of the development of this syndrome?
a. alpha-amylase
b. Serum iron
*c. Cholesterol
d. Sodium
e. Glucose
 
45. A 28-year-old patient has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Indicate a typical potential complication of this disease.
a. Lung cancer
*b. Pulmonary emphysema
c. Dry pleurisy
d. Exudative pleurisy
e. Lung abscess
 
46. What is the main goal of healthcare facilities as organizations?
a. ---
b. Compliance with government standards
c. Treatment of sick patients
*d. Restoring population health
e. Resource saving
 
47. A 49-year-old female patient complains of weakness, pain in the right hypochondrium, yellowing and persistent itching of the skin, discoloration of feces (acholic feces). Objectively observed: intense jaundice of the sclera and skin, enlarged liver, painful during palpation, spleen not palpable. For which type of jaundice are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Hepatic
b. -
*c. Mechanical
d. Hemolytic
e. Parenchymal
 
48. During surgery for disseminated peritonitis, the operating room nurse punctured a finger. The patient is HIV-infected. Post-exposure prophylaxis for HIV infection should be initiated no later than:
a. 12 hours
b. 48 hours
*c. 72 hours
d. 96 hours
e. 24 hours
 
49. What air temperature should be maintained in the incubator during the first 10 days after the birth of a child to prevent hypothermia if the child was born with a body weight of 1450 g?
a. 32°C
b. 33°C
*c. 35°C
d. 34°C
e. 30°C
 
50. An agricultural worker, after treating grain with organochlorine compounds to control pests, suddenly felt severe weakness, shortness of breath, and vomiting. Objectively observed: lethargy, twitching of the muscles of the lower and upper extremities. What measures should be taken first of all to provide emergency care to the patient?
a. Give an alkaline solution to drink
b. Administer glucose
c. Administer antispasmodics
*d. Wash skin and mucous membranes
e. Administer ascorbic acid
 
51. A 28-year-old man complains of chest pain, palpitations, and shortness of breath during physical exertion. Objectively observed: pale skin, head shaking, carotid artery pulsation, blood pressure - 180/50 mm Hg., increased and widespread apical impulse, heart borders are expanded to the left and downwards, a diastolic murmur is heard in the 3rd intercostal space near the left edge of the sternum. For which heart defect are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Pulmonary valve insufficiency
b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
*c. Aortic valve insufficiency
d. Mitral valve prolapse
e. Mitral valve insufficiency
 
52. Define an epidemic center in areas of natural disasters and other emergencies.
a. Territory in which people have been infected with infectious disease agents of a pandemic nature
b. Territory in which people have been infected with pathogens of infectious diseases that are not yet widespread
*c. Territory in which, within certain time and space limits, people were infected with infectious disease agents of a mass nature
d. Territory in which, within certain spatial boundaries, there has been a mass infection of people with infectious disease agents
e. Territory in which, within a certain time frame, people were infected with infectious disease agents of a mass nature
 
53. A 30-year-old woman at 32 weeks of pregnancy developed an attack of eclampsia. What measures should be taken to begin pre-medical care?
a. Measure saturation
b. Measure blood pressure
*c. Ensure the protection of women from harm
d. Perform peripheral vein catheterization
e. Stimulate labor
 
54. The emergency medical team urgently hospitalized a woman at 32 weeks of pregnancy with a preliminary diagnosis of severe preeclampsia to the maternity hospital. Which of the following actions should the admission nurse perform first?
a. Conduct an ECG study
b. Perform bladder catheterization
c. Administer nitroglycerin intravenously
d. Measure the fundal height and abdominal circumference
*e. Measure blood pressure and record the time of treatment
 
55. A 67-year-old patient with a diagnosis of chronic heart failure is prescribed digoxin. With which drug is it advisable to combine digoxin to reduce its side effects?
a. Calcium gluconate
*b. Panaginom
c. Hydrochlorothiazide
d. Paracetamol
e. Euphyllinum
 
56. Epidemic and environmental safety depends on the proper disposal of hospital waste. To which category of hospital waste do syringes and infusion sets belong?
a. Categories C
*b. Categories B
c. Category A
d. Category D
e. Categories E
 
57. A six-year-old child suddenly developed a body temperature of 39.5°C. Which drug is strictly contraindicated for use in children under 15 years of age to reduce high body temperature?
a. Ibuprofen
b. Mefenamic acid
c. -
d. Paracetamol
*e. Acetylsalicylic acid
 
58. Specify the most effective diagnostic method for detecting ascites.
a. Spiral computed tomography
b. Electrocardiography
c. Abdominal radiography
d. Sigmoidoscopy
*e. Ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs
 
59. What is the name of the graphic display of the results of dynamic observation during childbirth of the process of cervical dilation, advancement of the fetal head, labor activity, and the condition of the mother and fetus?
a. Individual card of a pregnant woman and a woman in labor
b. Exchange card
*c. Partogram
d. Cardiotocography
e. Gravidogram
 
60. A 42-year-old patient complains of general weakness, headache, tinnitus, a feeling of heat in the extremities, prolonged bleeding after tooth extraction. Objectively observed: red-cyanotic color of the face, upper extremities and mucous membranes, enlarged spleen, tenderness of flat bones, itching of the skin. The level of erythrocytes in the blood is 8.1⋅10^12/l. For which pathology are these clinical and laboratory indicators characteristic?
a. Acquired heart disease
b. Aplastic anemia
*c. Polycythemia vera
d. Hemophilia
e. Hives
 
61. A 58-year-old woman complains that 8 hours ago she felt a sharp weakness in her left arm and leg, speech disorders. At the time of examination, there were no symptoms, blood pressure --- 160/130 mm Hg. What pathological condition is this typical of?
*a. Transient ischemic attack
b. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
c. Epidural hemorrhage
d. Hemorrhagic stroke
e. Ischemic stroke
 
62. A 62-year-old patient complains of tingling of the tongue, decreased appetite, loss of taste sensations, impaired sensitivity, a feeling of "crawling ants" and coldness in the extremities, nausea, constipation. History: gastric resection. Objectively observed: unsteady gait, muscle weakness, pale skin with a lemon tint, smooth, glossy tongue, enlarged liver and spleen. The results of blood analysis revealed a decrease in the number of erythrocytes and hemoglobin, an increase in the color index, macrocytosis, Jolly bodies. For which type of anemia are these clinical and laboratory indicators characteristic?
a. Hypoplastic
b. Aplastic
*c. Vitamin B_12 deficiency
d. Posthemorrhagic
e. Iron deficiency
 
63. What formula is used to estimate the number of permanent teeth in a child, regardless of gender (where n is the number of years of the child)?
a. 4n +20
*b. 4n - 20
c. 10 + (2cdot n)
d. 75 + (5 times n)
e. 80 times n
 
64. Which of the following sources of law guarantees the right of Ukrainian citizens to health care?
a. Law of Ukraine "On Protection of the Population from Infectious Diseases"
b. Law of Ukraine "On Ensuring Sanitary and Epidemic Well-being of the Population"
c. Law of Ukraine "On the Public Health System"
d. Civil legislation of Ukraine
*e. Constitution of Ukraine
 
65. An 18-year-old female patient complains of amenorrhea for 4 months. Laboratory tests revealed hyperprolactinemia. What drug is used to reduce prolactin levels in the blood?
a. Allopurinol
b. Gidazepam
c. Captopril
d. Domperidone
*e. Cabergoline
 
66. The patient was admitted to the hospital in an unconscious state. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, dry, the eyeballs are soft, deep noisy breathing, a sharp smell of acetone is felt from the mouth, blood pressure - 95/65 mm Hg., pulse - 110 beats/min, rhythmic, the liver is painful and dense during palpation. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Cholestasis
b. Hepatic coma
c. Septic shock
d. Hypoglycemic coma
*e. Hyperglycemic coma
 
67. What does communication in management include?
*a. Transferring information from one object to another
b. Communication between members of a formal team
c. Utility networks
d. Communication between officials
e. Communication between people
 
68. A generalized qualitative indicator was calculated in a medical institution that characterizes the effectiveness of activities and defects in the work of the medical and preventive institution. What methodology was used to assess the activities of the medical and preventive institution?
a. Clinical expert assessment
b. Unified clinical protocol
c. Standard Operating Procedure
*d. End result model
e. Standard of medical care
 
69. Which radiation diagnostic method causes the greatest radiation exposure to the patient?
a. Magnetic resonance imaging
b. Digital radiography
c. Digital fluorography
*d. SCT (spiral computed tomography)
e. Ultrasound examination
 
70. A 68-year-old patient complains of a feeling of heaviness and dull pain in the right hypochondrium, nausea, bitterness in the mouth, itching of the skin, tendency to diarrhea, nosebleeds, decreased performance, weight loss, general weakness. History: viral hepatitis. Objectively observed: icteric sclera, vascular "stars" on the skin of the upper body, redness of the palms, "hepatic" odor from the mouth and an increase in abdominal volume, which does not correspond to the patient's constitution. These clinical manifestations are characteristic of which disease?
a. Cholestasis syndrome
b. Chronic pancreatitis
*c. Liver cirrhosis
d. Gallstone disease
e. Chronic non-calculous cholecystitis
 
71. A nurse at an oncology hospital, while working in a team, demonstrates psychological flexibility, the ability to defend her opinion without violating the moral rights of other employees, the ability to respond optimally to criticism, speak politely with colleagues and patients, voice her ideas and needs clearly and without aggression, and shows empathy. Which component of communicative competence is well developed in a nurse?
*a. Assertiveness
b. Deviance
c. Intelligence
d. Perceptivity
e. Stress resistance
 
72. A 37-year-old patient, after an antibiotic injection, suddenly developed severe general weakness, a feeling of heat and a rush of blood to the face, chest tightness and difficulty breathing, ringing in the ears, headache, and itching of the skin. Objectively observed: respiratory disorders, blood pressure - 70/30 mm Hg, pulse - 100 beats/min. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Drug-induced urticaria
b. Angioedema
c. Epidermal necrolysis
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Cardiogenic shock
 
73. A three-year-old child developed a disease with the following clinical manifestations: acute violent onset with a sudden increase in body temperature to 40^oC, the appearance on the back, buttocks, chest and back of the thighs of a hemorrhagic rash of a star-shaped shape with a diameter of 2-5 mm, which has a dense infiltrated base, rises above the skin surface and does not disappear after pressure. What group of drugs is used for etiotropic therapy of this disease?
a. Anticonvulsants
b. Probiotics
*c. Antibacterial
d. Antispasmodics
e. Hepatoprotectors
 
74. A 62-year-old patient with a diagnosis of sinus tachyarrhythmia is taking anaprilin at a dose of 10 mg 3 times a day. Indicate the possible side effects of using this medication.
*a. Bronchospasm
b. Tachycardia
c. Pulmonary edema
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Ulceration
 
75. Specify the type of female infertility caused by the formation of antisperm antibodies.
a. Psychogenic
*b. Immunological
c. Endocrine
d. Tube-peritoneal
e. Uterine
 
76. A patient diagnosed with $B_{12$-deficiency anemia has gait disturbance, lower limb muscle atrophy, and limb sensitivity impairment. Indicate the probable cause of these symptoms.
*a. Funicular myelosis
b. Osteoporosis
c. Atherosclerosis
d. Polyarthritis
e. Myopathy
 
77. A patient who is in hospital with a diagnosis of pneumonia, after a rapid transition from a horizontal to a vertical position, suddenly developed sharp pallor of the skin, dizziness, and shallow and rapid breathing. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, covered with cold sticky sweat, facial features are pointed, extremities are cold to the touch, pulse is weak, 95/min, blood pressure - 85/60 mm Hg. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Myocardial infarction
b. Hypoglycemia
*c. Collapse
d. Pulmonary edema
e. Anaphylactic shock
 
78. A patient in the intensive care unit has developed orthostatic collapse. What medication should be used to provide emergency care to the patient in this case?
*a. 1% mezaton solution
b. 2% drotaverine solution
c. 50% analgin solution
d. 2% papaverine solution
e. 0.2% solution of platifillin
 
79. Indicate the symptom of acute appendicitis (according to the author), which is characterized by the appearance of pain in the epigastric region with its subsequent movement to the right iliac region.
a. Rovzinga
b. Obraztsova
c. Shchetkin-Blumberg
d. Bartomier-Michelson
*e. Kocher-Volkovych
 
80. There are 500 children registered at a children's clinic. During the previous year, 125 preschool children, 25 primary school children, and 50 middle and high school children fell ill. Calculate the health index of children registered at the children's clinic.
*a. 60
b. 300
c. 2.5
d. 200
e. 85
 
81. What leadership style is based on collegial decision-making, taking into account the opinions and, if possible, wishes of subordinates, delegating some authority to subordinates, and encouraging their participation?
a. Bureaucratic
b. Synthetic
c. Authoritarian
*d. Democratic
e. Liberal
 
82. A 42-year-old man is diagnosed with a dislocation of the mandible. What type of bandage is applied after the mandible is set to immobilize (fix) the jaw in a certain position?
a. Cruciform
*b. Sling-shaped
c. Cap
d. Neapolitan
e. Nodal
 
83. After emotional overload, a man suddenly developed a sharp "dagger" pain in the epigastric region, developed general weakness, and vomited once. Objectively observed: the skin is pale, covered with cold sweat, the tongue is dry, the muscles of the anterior abdominal wall are sharply tense (board-shaped abdomen), during percussion, hepatic dullness is not determined. According to the results of a survey radiography of the abdominal cavity, pneumoperitoneum in the form of a crescent-shaped strip was detected under the right dome of the diaphragm. For which pathology are these clinical and radiological indicators characteristic?
a. Acute calculous cholecystitis
b. Acute appendicitis
c. Acute pancreatitis
*d. Perforating stomach ulcer
e. Gastrointestinal bleeding
 
84. What qualities of a manager does the head of an organization possess if he demonstrates the ability to distribute tasks and responsibilities among employees, as well as to implement strategic and tactical control?
a. -
b. Professional and business
c. Socio-psychological
d. Moral
*e. Administrative and organizational
 
85. At which stage of the organizational management process is the design and planning of a management decision taking place?
a. 4
b. 3
p. 1
d. 5
*e. 2
 
86. In which department of a medical institution is it advisable to treat a patient with an exacerbation of chronic bronchitis if, according to the doctor's prescription, he is shown parenteral administration of drugs and additional laboratory examination?
a. Medical rehabilitation departments
b. Sociotherapy departments
*c. Day hospital of therapeutic profile
d. Specialized dispensary
e. Inpatient department of the hospital 24 hours a day
 
87. During the examination and examination of a child (age - 3 months), who was born with a large body weight (over 4000 g), objectively observed: dry and pale skin, pasty face, disproportionate physique (short limbs, relatively long torso, wide hands, with short fingers), head circumference within normal limits, narrow palpebral fissures, wide sunken nose, thickened tongue. For which disease are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Cystic fibrosis
b. Primary hypogonadism
c. Pituitary dwarfism
*d. Congenital hypothyroidism
e. Rickets
 
88. Specify the form of social health insurance in countries with a developed health care system, which is a component of the social insurance system and is carried out in accordance with the procedure provided for by the legislation of the country and is accordingly approved by the government.
*a. Required
b. Private
c. Voluntary
d. Mixed
e. State
 
89. A 45-year-old patient complains of left-sided chest pain that worsens during breathing, coughing, bending the body to the healthy side, and an unproductive, painful cough. Objectively observed: chest mobility is limited on the affected side, pleural friction rub is heard on auscultation. For which disease are the indicated clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Acute bronchitis
*b. Dry pleurisy
c. Bronchial asthma
d. Bronchiectasis
e. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
 
90. What are the basic standards that ensure the quality of medical care in healthcare facilities?
*a. Health care standards
b. Consumer protection laws
c. Technical characteristics of medical devices
d. Labor legislation for healthcare professionals
e. Health professional development programs
 
91. Indicate the main cause of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
a. Allergy
b. Atherosclerosis
c. Frequent viral diseases
*d. Smoking cigarettes
e. Hereditary factor
 
92. The patient has a preliminary diagnosis of diphtheria of the throat. From which areas is pathological material taken to clarify the diagnosis?
*a. From the oropharynx and nose
b. From the posterior wall of the pharynx
c. Under the tongue
d. From the oropharynx
e. From the nose
 
93. What is the purpose of strategic planning?
a. Combine the internal strengths of the organization with the favorable opportunities of the external environment
*b. Keep the organization in a state of compliance with the changing external environment, as well as understand the organization's current and future capabilities in relation to these changes
c. Obtain forecast performance results
d. Provide sufficient innovation
e. Ensure that innovations are sufficiently aligned with the relevant changing external environment
 
94. Specify the examination that should be performed on patients after 40 years of age for the purpose of glaucoma screening.
a. Ophthalmoscopy
b. Perimeter
*c. Tonometry
d. Visometry
e. Campimetry
 
95. A patient with pulmonary tuberculosis suddenly felt a tightness in his chest after physical exertion and developed a paroxysmal cough, during which frothy blood (bright red, slowly coagulating) began to flow from his mouth and nose. Objectively observed: general condition is severe, skin is pale, heart rate - 43/min, blood pressure - 95/60 mm Hg. Art., pulse - 115/min, thready. What complication of the underlying disease has the patient developed?
a. Gastric bleeding
*b. Pulmonary hemorrhage
c. Spontaneous pneumothorax
d. Nosebleed
e. Open pneumothorax
 
96. Indicate the prerequisites for determining the purpose of the organization.
a. Situation analysis, problem description, strategic planning
b. Situation analysis, problem definition
c. Situation analysis, problem description, strategy formulation
d. Coordination with local authorities
*e. Registration of problem indicators, situation analysis, problem description
 
97. What is the name of the erroneous or inadequate actions of a medical professional that were performed for preventive, diagnostic or therapeutic purposes, caused the development of a disease or pathological condition in a patient and are classified as an accident from a legal point of view.
a. Medical error
b. Medical error
c. Omission
d. Medical negligence
*e. Iatrogenicity
 
98. What contraceptives are used in dermatology to treat acne?
a. Single-component oral contraceptives
b. -
c. Spermicides
*d. Combined oral contraceptives
e. Injectable contraceptives
 
99. A patient with rheumatoid arthritis who has been taking glucocorticoids for a year has developed symptoms of osteoporosis. What instrumental method of examination is informative for determining bone density?
a. Tomography
b. Thermography
c. Angiography
*d. Densitometry
e. Arthropneumography
 
100. A six-month-old child has restlessness, poor sleep, increased sweating of the head (especially the back of the head), vasomotor excitability, and increased skin sensitivity. During an objective examination, the following were found: baldness of the back of the head, softening of the edges of the anterior fontanelle. For which period of rickets are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Rickets tetany
b. Convalescence
c. Residual phenomena
*d. Primary
e. The beginning of the
 
101. A 55-year-old patient suddenly developed shortness of breath, cough with pink foamy sputum, pain in the heart area, palpitations. History: myocardial infarction six months ago. Objectively observed: skin covered with cold sweat, acrocyanosis, swelling of the neck veins, auscultation of silent moist rales in the lower parts of the lungs, heart sounds are muffled, pulse - 110 beats/min, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. What body position should be given to the patient in this case?
a. Lying down, with lower limbs elevated
*b. Semi-sitting, with lower limbs lowered
c. Orthopnea
d. On the left side
e. On the right side
 
102. What is the name of the process of officially recognizing the status of a healthcare facility, its availability of conditions for providing a certain level of medical care, confirmation of its compliance with established criteria, and a guarantee of high quality professional activities?
a. Sanitation
b. Standardization
*c. Accreditation
d. Licensing
e. Approbation
 
103. A 55-year-old female patient is unconscious. History: insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension. Objectively observed: pale skin, profuse sweating, dilated pupils, pulse - 98 beats/min, blood pressure - 140/90 mm Hg, convulsions. What complication has developed in the patient?
a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Anaphylactic shock
c. Hypertensive crisis
*d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Hyperglycemic coma
 
104. A woman at 34 weeks of pregnancy is diagnosed with severe preeclampsia. For the prevention of which pathological condition is she prescribed intravenous magnesium sulfate in this case?
a. Placental abruption during childbirth
b. Hemorrhagic shock
c. Blood loss during childbirth
d. Premature birth
*e. By court
 
105. What is the economic basis of the managed care model?
a. Strategic and ongoing planning of financial resources
b. Rational use of limited resources
c. Differentiation of financial resources, increasing the share of funds for medical care
*d. Financing of a complex of medical institutions based on a per capita standard within the scope of certain social guarantees
e. Formation by consumers of medical services of the optimal volume and structure of medical care
 
106. The MARCH algorithm is a key component of the TCCC (Tactical Combat Casualty Care) concept and is used to prioritize and manage the treatment of casualties in tactical and combat situations. Choose the sequence (order) of actions according to this algorithm.
a. Address any respiratory distress, treat hypothermia, assess and ensure stable circulation, treat massive bleeding, assess and monitor airway patency
b. Assess and ensure stable circulation, correct hypothermia, correct any respiratory distress, correct massive bleeding, assess and monitor airway patency
*c. Eliminate massive bleeding, assess and control airway patency, eliminate any respiratory disorders, assess and ensure stable circulation, eliminate hypothermia
d. -
e. Treat hypothermia, assess and monitor airway patency, resolve any respiratory distress, treat massive bleeding, assess and ensure stable circulation
 
107. A 30-year-old man suddenly grabbed his neck while eating, he developed cyanosis, was unable to breathe, had no voice, and was coughing. What measures should be taken first to provide immediate assistance to the man?
a. Tracheotomy
b. Tracheal intubation
c. Digital inspection of the oral cavity
d. Conicotomy
*e. Heimlich maneuver
 
108. Specify the period of effective use of medical masks.
a. 7--8 hours
b. 2 days
*c. 3--4 hours
d. 5--6 hours
e. 24 hours
 
109. A patient in the hematology department complains of weakness, severe sweating, itching of the skin, increased body temperature, and enlarged lymph nodes. For which disease are these symptoms typical?
a. Iron deficiency anemia
b. Aplastic anemia
*c. Hodgkin's disease
d. Chronic posthemorrhagic anemia
e. Werlhof's diseases
 
110. What type of enema is used to decompress the gastrointestinal tract in the case of conservative treatment of mechanical intestinal obstruction?
a. Nutritious
b. Microclyster
c. Purification
*d. Siphon
e. Therapeutic
 
111. What management principle does a senior nurse violate if, while working in a team, she ignores the opinions of other employees, discredits them in the eyes of patients, imposes her opinion, and makes decisions alone without consulting her superiors?
a. Reflexivity
*b. Collegiality
c. Analytical skills
d. Systematicity
e. Transparency
 
112. Which management function includes a set of internal and external factors (intentions, needs, motives) that activate the activity of the subject and act as a complex set of changing needs?
a. Communication
*b. Motivational and stimulating
c. Planning
d. Organizational
e. Control and evaluation
 
113. A 58-year-old patient has been suffering from arterial hypertension for 6 years. After psycho-emotional overload, she suddenly developed dizziness, dry mouth, tinnitus, redness of the skin, tremor of the limbs, and frequent urination. Objectively observed: consciousness is clear, skin is hyperemic, moist, blood pressure is 190/100 mm Hg, pulse is 95/min, no motor or sensory disorders are detected. Blood glucose level is 3.8 mmol/l. What complication of the underlying disease has the patient developed?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Ischemic stroke
c. Hemorrhagic stroke
d. Hyperglycemic coma
*e. Hypertensive crisis
 
114. Name a healthcare system that incorporates the principle of social solidarity ("the healthy pays for the sick, the young for the old, the rich for the poor").
a. State
*b. Insurance
c. -
d. Mixed
e. Private
 
115. A 54-year-old man suddenly developed an attack of shortness of breath at night, accompanied by difficult exhalation and dry paroxysmal cough. Objectively observed: the patient occupies a forced sitting position, RR - 24/min, percussion over the lungs reveals a box sound, dry wheezing rales, prolonged exhalation are heard during lung auscultation. Which of the following drugs should be used first of all to provide emergency care?
a. Ambroxol
*b. Salbutamol
c. Adrenaline
d. Papaverine
e. Glaucine
 
116. A newborn baby was born from a previous pregnancy with a body weight of 5 kg and resuscitation measures were performed. After the child's breathing and heartbeat were restored, convulsions began. What medicine should be administered to the child first?
a. 2% solution of euphylline
b. Prednisolone
*c. 0.5% sibazone solution
d. Dexamethasone
e. 20% glucose solution
 
117. What antidote is used in case of methanol poisoning?
a. Glucocorticosteroids
b. Glucose
*c. Ethyl alcohol (ethanol)
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Sodium thiosulfate
 
118. A 68-year-old patient complains of a feeling of heaviness and dull pain in the right hypochondrium, nausea, a feeling of bitterness in the mouth, itching of the skin, a tendency to diarrhea, nosebleeds, decreased performance, weight loss and general weakness. History: viral hepatitis. During the examination, the following are observed: icteric sclera, vascular <<stars>> on the skin, <<livery palms>>, <<livery>> bad breath, on the anterior abdominal wall --- <<head of a jellyfish>>, ascites. For which disease are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Chronic pancreatitis
*b. Liver cirrhosis
c. Chronic cholangitis
d. Gallstone disease
e. Chronic cholecystitis
 
119. What drug is prescribed to prevent hemorrhagic disease of the newborn to all healthy children in the first day of life?
a. Vitamin $B$
b. Vitamin $C$
*c. Vitamin $K$
d. Vitamin $A$
e. Vitamin D
 
120. An 11-year-old girl complains of intense, prolonged pain in the upper abdomen and to the right of the navel, occurring at night. History: chronic gastritis. What diagnostic procedure is most appropriate to perform to establish the diagnosis in this case?
a. Urinalysis
*b. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
c. Fecal occult blood test
d. Ultrasound examination of the ENT
e. Stool coprological examination
 
121. A 28-year-old woman complains of weakness, palpitations and shortness of breath during physical exertion, and taste distortion. In the anamnesis --- menorrhagia. Objectively observed: skin and mucous membranes are pale, liver and spleen are not enlarged. Results of a complete blood count: erythrocytes --- $3.1 · 10^{12$/l, hemoglobin --- 60 g/l, CP --- 0.65, leukocytes --- $4.0 · 10^9$/l, ESR --- 22 mm/h. Which laboratory test is the most informative for establishing the diagnosis?
a. Gregersen reaction
b. Determination of gastric acidity
c. Coombs test
d. Coprogram
*e. Ferritin level test
 
122. The patient complains of a squeezing pain behind the sternum with irradiation to the left arm and shoulder blade, which occurs during physical exertion, passes after taking nitroglycerin. Objectively observed: no edema was detected, pulse --- 72 beats/min, rhythmic, blood pressure --- 135/90 mm Hg. What pathology are these clinical manifestations typical of?
a. Intercostal neuralgia
b. Small-focal non-Q-wave myocardial infarction
c. Large-focal Q-wave myocardial infarction
*d. Angina pectoris
e. Angina at rest
 
123. What specific antidote is used to provide emergency care to a patient in case of methyl alcohol poisoning?
a. Prednisolone
*b. Ethanol
c. Euphyllin
d. Aminazine
e. Methyl alcohol
 
124. A 38-year-old patient with diagnosed liver cirrhosis developed excessive drowsiness, disorientation in time and space, short-term motor excitement and aggression. Objectively observed: tremor of fingers and lips, change in handwriting, increasing jaundice, increase in body temperature to 37.5^oC. What complication did the patient develop?
a. Bacterial peritonitis
b. Bleeding
*c. Hepatic encephalopathy
d. Hypersplenism
e. Hepato-renal syndrome
 
125. A 15-year-old girl, after eating homemade canned meat, complained of cramp-like abdominal pain, a single bout of vomiting, diarrhea, decreased visual acuity, double vision, difficulty swallowing, hoarseness, and decreased voice timbre. These clinical manifestations are typical of which infectious disease?
a. Shigellosis
b. Cholera
*c. Botulism
d. Tetanus
e. Food poisoning
 
126. A 48-year-old patient after psycho-emotional overload developed headache and pain in the heart area, feeling of anxiety, chills, frequent urination. Objectively observed: facial skin is hyperemic, heart tones are rhythmic and increased, pulse - 92/min, tense, blood pressure - 190/100 mm Hg. Which of the following drugs is used to provide emergency care to the patient in this case?
a. Ramipril
b. Carvedilol
*c. Captopril
d. Lercanidipine
e. Nitroglycerin
 
127. In a healthcare facility, by order of the Ministry of Health, a department was created, which included: an epidemiologist, an assistant epidemiologist, an antimicrobial administration coordinator, a hand hygiene coordinator, an infection prevention education and training coordinator, and a statistician. Specify this department.
a. Epidemiological
*b. Infection control
c. Particularly dangerous infections
d. Prevention of nosocomial infections
e. Infectious diseases
 
128. An 18-year-old female patient has a height of --- 185 cm, and a foot size of --- 44. What laboratory marker level should be determined to exclude pathology?
a. Vasopressin
b. Blood glucose
c. Blood protein
*d. Somatotropic hormone
e. 17-ketosteroids
 
129. A woman at 37 weeks of pregnancy was hospitalized in the emergency department of a maternity hospital. The patient complains of severe headache, flashing "flies" before her eyes. Objectively observed: blood pressure - 160/110 mm Hg. Art., edema of the lower extremities and anterior abdominal wall, proteinuria in a single urine sample - 5 g/l. During the examination, the patient began to have tonic-clonic seizures. What measures should be taken first of all at the stage of providing emergency first aid?
a. Blood pressure monitoring
b. Conducting antihypertensive therapy
c. Administration of anticonvulsant drugs
d. Oxygen therapy
*e. Ensuring airway patency
 
130. Which stage of laryngeal stenosis is characterized by the following clinical manifestations: severe general condition of the patient, agitation, motor disorders, significant cyanosis of the skin, pronounced inspiratory dyspnea, noisy breathing, and rapid pulse?
a. II
*b. III
c. -
d. And
e. IV
 
131. Which management theory states that an organization's external environment has its own rules, norms, and requirements that the organization must comply with?
a. Population ecology
b. Situational conditioning
c. Resource dependencies
*d. Institutional
e. Strategic management concept
 
132. In a newborn child, during a general blood test, the following indicators were found: erythrocytes - 7.2x10^{12/l, hemoglobin - 210 g/l, leukocytes - 30x10^9/l, neutrophils - 60%, lymphocytes - 16%. For which day of life in the neonatal period are these peripheral blood indicators typical?
*a. First
b. Fifteenth
c. Fifth
d. Twelfth
e. Tenth
 
133. A patient who has been treated for bronchial asthma for 8 years is hospitalized in the pulmonology department. What drug is used for basic pharmacotherapy of bronchial asthma?
a. Ceftriaxone
b. Salbutamol
c. Loratadine
*d. Pulmicort
e. Euphyllin
 
134. A 55-year-old man suddenly developed paroxysmal pain in the lumbar region at night, radiating to the right thigh and genitals, and frequent urge to urinate. What medications should be used to provide emergency care to the patient?
*a. Antispasmodics, analgesics
b. Antispasmodics, glucocorticoids
c. Analgesics, antihistamines
d. Diuretics, antihistamines
e. Diuretics, glucocorticoids
 
135. A 35-year-old female patient complains of irritability, weakness, poor sleep, tremor and sweating of the extremities. Objectively observed: pronounced exophthalmos, diffusely enlarged thyroid gland, not painful, pulse --- 100 beats/min, blood pressure --- 160/90 mm Hg. What pathology are these clinical manifestations typical of?
a. Arterial hypertension
*b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Endemic goiter
d. Diabetes mellitus
e. Hypothyroidism
 
136. A 32-year-old woman was hospitalized in the maternity ward at 28 weeks of pregnancy (pregnancy I) with complaints of cramp-like pain in the lower abdomen and sacrum, the appearance of mucous-bloody vaginal discharge. A preliminary diagnosis was made: the threat of premature birth. A plan for prolonging pregnancy was determined and dexamethasone was prescribed. Indicate the purpose of prescribing this medication in this case.
a. Pain relief
*b. Prevention of fetal respiratory distress syndrome
c. Suppression of uterine contractile activity
d. Symptomatic therapy
e. Prevention of Rh-immunization in the fetus during pregnancy
 
137. A patient is diagnosed with bronchial asthma. What device should he use to monitor bronchial obstruction?
a. Nebulizer
b. Spirometer
c. Pocket inhaler
d. Pulse oximeter
*e. Peakflowmeter
 
138. A nine-month-old child was born from a second full-term pregnancy with a body weight of --- 3200 g, height of --- 51 cm, is on artificial feeding. During the examination, signs of rickets were found. In the morning, while crying, a sudden short-term respiratory arrest occurred, after which a loud inhalation occurred like a <<rooster's cry>>. What pathological condition has developed in the child?
*a. Spasmophilia, laryngospasm
b. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
c. Spasmophilia, carpopedal spasm
d. Vitamin D hypervitaminosis
e. Spasmophilia, eclampsia
 
139. Specify the type of voluntary health insurance.
a. Intra-industry
b. Group
c. Tourist
*d. Collective
e. Inter-sectoral
 
140. Which structural unit of the polyclinic includes the following list of premises: the office of the head of the department, the doctor's office, wards, a dining room, psychological relief rooms, and a procedure room?
a. Day surgery department
b. Preventive department
c. Clinical diagnostic laboratory
*d. Day hospital
e. Rehabilitation treatment department
 
141. A patient is being treated in the infectious disease department with a diagnosis of viral hepatitis B. Which of the following symptoms are most characteristic of this disease?
a. Fever, headache, vomiting
b. Vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration
c. Headache, photophobia, runny nose
*d. Jaundice of the skin and sclera, darkening of urine
e. Chills, cough, lacrimation
 
142. A ten-year-old child suddenly lost consciousness during a competition. During the awakening, he does not react to sound and pain stimuli, there is a slowdown in breathing, there is no pulse on the peripheral arteries. According to the results of ECG monitoring: supraventricular tachycardia with a heart rate of --- 200 beats/min. What measures should be taken to begin providing emergency care to the child?
a. Put an ice pack on your face
b. Perform indirect heart massage
c. Administer atropine 20 mcg/kg body weight
d. Perform defibrillation with an initial energy of 4 J/kg body weight
*e. Perform electrocardioversion with an initial energy of 1 J/kg body weight
 
143. Specify the clinical manifestations of the neurological syndrome that develops against the background of vitamin B_12 deficiency anemia.
a. Tongue pinching
b. Nausea and vomiting
*c. Paresthesia of hands and feet
d. Ictericity of the sclera
e. Increased body temperature
 
144. A man suddenly grabbed his neck while eating. Objectively observed: facial expression is frightened, he cannot inhale or exhale, skin is pale with a cyanotic tint, voice and cough are absent. What emergency measures should be applied immediately?
a. Precordial stroke
b. Receiving Safar
c. Parenteral administration of 2% solution of euphylline
*d. Heimlich maneuver
e. Oxygen therapy
 
145. Which structural method of conflict prevention involves developing or clarifying goals so that the efforts of all employees are united and directed towards their achievement?
*a. Defining organizational goals
b. Coordination mechanisms
c. Clarification of job requirements
d. Reward system
e. Formation of integration mechanisms
 
146. Specify the drug used for dehydration therapy of pulmonary edema.
a. Albumin
b. Prednisolone
c. Digoxin
*d. Furosemide
e. Insulin
 
147. Which of the following patients is indicated for treatment in the day hospital of a medical center?
*a. A 49-year-old patient with exacerbation of chronic cholecystitis
b. A 78-year-old patient with stage IV gastric cancer
c. A 56-year-old patient with end-stage liver cirrhosis
d. A 67-year-old patient with acute cerebrovascular accident
e. A 27-year-old patient who is indicated for osteosynthesis
 
148. Indicate the basic principle of organizing medical and sanitary assistance to the population.
a. Comprehensiveness of periodic medical care
b. Screening as a system of primary examination
*c. Comprehensiveness of outpatient and inpatient, therapeutic and preventive care
d. Medical examination and active surveillance of the population's health
e. Comprehensiveness of ongoing medical care
 
149. A newborn child on the 4th day of life had a body temperature increase to 38.5-39.5°C for 3 hours. The child's general condition worsened, anxiety, dryness of the mucous membranes, skin hyperemia, and tremor of the limbs appeared. No pathological changes were detected in other organs and systems. What condition is characterized by such clinical manifestations?
a. Sexual crisis
b. Transient hypothermia
*c. Transient hyperthermia
d. Uric acid infarction
e. Physiological jaundice
 
150. Dependence on the external environment is one of the most important characteristics of a medical organization. What factors of the external environment are within the sphere of direct influence on it?
a. Ecological situation and natural and climatic conditions
b. Demographic situation and norms of human behavior
c. International events and the political situation in the country
*d. Consumers, competitors, resource suppliers
e. State of the economy and scientific and technological progress
 
151. A 45-year-old patient suddenly developed shortness of breath, paroxysmal cough, and chest tightness at night. Objectively observed: pale skin with a cyanotic tinge, difficult and prolonged exhalation, distant dry wheezing. For which disease are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Angina pectoris
b. Myocardial infarction
c. Pulmonary edema
*d. Bronchial asthma
e. Heart failure
 
152. A patient is in the surgical department after a gastric resection. His history includes chronic bronchitis and thrombophlebitis of the veins of the lower extremities. Specify the measures for the prevention of congestive pneumonia in the patient in the early postoperative period.
a. Prescribing antibiotics
b. Applying elastic bandages
*c. Conducting breathing exercises
d. Frequent ventilation of the room
e. Adherence to strict bed rest
 
153. A 32-year-old patient complains of vomiting and sharp <<dagger>> pain in the epigastric region. In the anamnesis --- gastric ulcer. Objectively observed: skin is pale, abdomen during palpation is tense, board-like, pulse --- 82 beats/min, threadlike, blood pressure --- 110/80 mm Hg. What complication of the underlying disease has developed in the patient?
a. Penetration
b. Pyloric stenosis
*c. Perforation
d. Bleeding
e. Malignancy
 
154. In medical institutions and health care systems, management plays an important role in ensuring the efficiency, quality, and accessibility of medical services. Give the correct definition of the concept of "management".
*a. The process of making management decisions to achieve the organization's goals
b. The process of influencing the moral responsibility of medical personnel
c. Algorithm of standards aimed at ensuring the social responsibility of medical personnel
d. A system of rules aimed at regulating the financial activities of an organization
e. Procedure for managing medical activities
 
155. Specify the group of qualities of a manager that includes high professionalism, strategic thinking, idea generation, authority, risk-taking ability, making managerial decisions, and a desire for professional growth.
a. Socio-psychological
b. Administrative and organizational
*c. Professional and business
d. Human
e. Moral
 
156. A patient has been previously diagnosed with acute leukemia and has undergone a bone marrow aspiration biopsy for diagnostic purposes. Which of the following anatomical sites is the preferred site for obtaining this biomaterial?
*a. Sternum
b. Humerus
c. Vertebra
d. Occipital bone
e. Rib
 
157. A six-year-old child suddenly developed signs of drug allergy such as urticaria and angioedema after parenteral administration of an antibiotic. What group of drugs is used in emergency care in this case?
a. Sedatives
b. Antibacterial
*c. Glucocorticosteroids
d. Diuretics
e. Vitamins
 
158. Name the three main types of leader behavior depending on leadership style.
*a. Autocratic, democratic, liberal
b. Anarchic, autocratic, partocratic
c. Democratic, liberal, ochlocratic
d. Democratic, monarchical, party-political
e. Partocratic, monarchical, liberal
 
159. A patient diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis has developed pulmonary hemorrhage. What body position should the patient be placed in during care?
*a. Fowler
b. Knee-elbow
c. Trendelenburg
d. Sims
e. Orthopnea
 
160. A patient with an attack of bronchial asthma developed resistance to bronchodilators. What complication did the patient develop?
a. Cardiogenic shock
b. Pulmonary edema
c. Respiratory distress syndrome
*d. Asthmatic status
e. Anaphylactic shock
 
161. While performing a combat mission, a soldier suffered a traumatic amputation of a limb. There is massive blood loss. The victim requires anesthesia, antibiotics, and stump immobilization during the evacuation phase. According to which version of the MARCH algorithm should he be provided with pre-hospital care?
a. MARCH-E
*b. MARCH-PAWS
c. MARCH-ABC
d. MARCH-DE
e. MARCH-ELS
 
162. A 27-year-old woman at 9-10 weeks of pregnancy suddenly developed severe pain in the lower abdomen and profuse bleeding from the genital tract. The results of bimanual examination: the cervical canal is dilated, parts of the fetal egg are found in it. Indicate the clinical stage of spontaneous abortion.
a. Missed abortion
b. -
c. Threatened abortion
d. Abortion that has begun
*e. Abortion in progress
 
163. Which of the following skills are "soft skills" and are key to a successful medical unit manager?
a. High medical qualifications and proficiency in foreign languages
b. High medical qualifications and knowledge of programming languages
c. Aggressiveness and competitiveness
d. Independence and initiative
*e. Sociability and ability to cooperate
 
164. A 37-year-old woman, after excessive coffee consumption, suddenly developed an attack of rapid heartbeat, accompanied by excitement, sweating, a feeling of fear and trembling in the heart area. Objectively observed: pale skin, rapid breathing, swelling of the neck veins and their pulsation synchronously with the pulse, rhythmic pulse, weak filling, significantly accelerated, heart rate - 170/min, blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg. What measures should be taken first to provide emergency care to the patient?
a. Nitroglycerin sublingually
b. Intravenous administration of atropine
c. Load tests
d. Intravenous administration of adrenaline
*e. Weighing tests
 
165. A child attending a preschool has a fever of up to 38°C, sore throat, a small-spotted rash on the skin, pale nasolabial triangle, and a "crimson tongue." Specify the duration of the child's isolation.
a. 5 days
b. 9 days
c. 17 days
*d. 22 days
e. 3 days
 
166. A 74-year-old patient with diabetes mellitus was admitted to the hospital in an unconscious state. Objectively observed: pronounced dryness of the skin and mucous membranes, increased body temperature, decreased skin turgor and eyeball tone, rapid deep breathing without the smell of acetone in the exhaled air, a sharp decrease in urine output. Blood glucose level - 52.7 mmol/l. In the urine: glucosuria, acetonuria was not detected. What type of diabetic coma has developed in the patient?
a. Hyperlactacidemic
b. Hyperketonemic
*c. Hyperosmolar
d. -
e. Ketoacidotic
 
167. What form of health insurance, according to the Law of Ukraine "On Insurance", operates in Ukraine by financing from the funds of individuals (individual) and legal entities (collective) according to the insurance rules established by the insurer independently?
a. Non-commercial
*b. Voluntary
c. Mandatory
d. Special
e. General
 
168. Specify the hemostatic drug used for the prevention and treatment of capillary bleeding of various etiologies and localizations (nosebleeds, bleeding gums).
*a. Etamsylate (dicynone)
b. Furosemide
c. Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin)
d. Hydrocortisone
e. Paracetamol
 
169. To which pathological condition are patients with asthenic body type prone to develop?
*a. Arterial hypotension
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Obesity
d. Arterial hypertension
e. Hyperglycemic coma
 
170. Specify the symptom of acute appendicitis, characterized by pain in the epigastric region with its subsequent movement to the right iliac region (after 2-6 hours).
a. Bartomier-Michelson
b. Shttkin-Blumberg
c. Rovzinga
*d. Kocher-Volkovych
e. Obraztsova
 
171. A 48-year-old female patient, after eating excessively spicy and fatty food, felt a sharp, paroxysmal pain in the right hypochondrium, which radiates to the back, right scapula and shoulder and does not decrease when changing body position. The pain is accompanied by nausea and vomiting, which does not bring relief. Objectively observed: the abdomen is painful on palpation in the right hypochondrium, positive Kerr and Ortner symptoms on the right. For which pathological condition are such clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Intestinal colic
b. Acute pancreatitis
*c. Hepatic colic
d. Renal colic
e. Acute appendicitis
 
172. A nurse at a rural outpatient clinic has detected symptoms of a ruptured ectopic pregnancy in a 25-year-old patient. What actions should the healthcare professional take in this case?
a. Refer the patient to an antenatal clinic
b. Administer hemostatic drugs
*c. Immediately hospitalize the patient to the hospital
d. Refer the patient for ultrasound
e. Administer painkillers
 
173. Indicate the main functions of informal leaders.
a. Influences on changing decisions of formal leaders
b. Impact on the rotation of functions among its members
c. Impact on the quality of social interaction within the organization
d. Anticipating the emergence of conflict situations
*e. Achieving the set goal and strengthening the organization
 
174. The head nurse of the perinatal center analyzes its activities. She identified internal shortcomings and advantages, prescribed opportunities and external threats in the center's activities. After analyzing them in pairs, she received a development strategy. What methodology did she use?
a. PEST analysis
b. PESTEL analysis
c. BSC analysis
*d. SWOT analysis
e. ANPO analysis
 
175. Specify the drug used to eliminate muscarinic effects (hypersalivation, bronchorrhea, hyperhidrosis, bradycardia) during poisoning with organophosphorus compounds.
a. Naloxone
b. Ethyl alcohol
c. Adrenaline hydrochloride
*d. Atropine sulfate
e. Lidocaine hydrochloride
 
176. Potassium plays an important role in heart muscle function and heart rhythm regulation. Which of the following foods is the most common source of this macronutrient?
a. Meat, liver
b. Pasta, bread
*c. Bananas, dried fruits
d. Carrots, beets
e. Milk, cream
 
177. A seven-year-old child has difficulty breathing from the nose and has a thick discharge from the nose. During examination, maceration of the nasal wings and upper lip was detected. During rhinoscopy, whitish-gray films were found on the mucous membrane of the nasal septum, which were difficult to remove. For which disease are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Acute sinusitis
b. Acute rhinitis
c. Diphtheria of the larynx
d. Allergic rhinitis
*e. Diphtheria of the nose
 
178. Specify the group of qualities of a manager that includes patriotism, national consciousness, intelligence, humanity, decency, and a sense of duty.
*a. Moral
b. Human
c. Professional and business
d. Socio-psychological
e. Administrative and organizational
 
179. A 54-year-old man after physical exertion developed intense burning pain behind the sternum and under the left shoulder blade, lasting more than 1.5 hours, severe weakness, anxiety, a feeling of fear of death. Objectively observed: pale skin, sweating, acrocyanosis, blood pressure - 80/50 mm Hg. Art., pulse - 102/min. What changes will be recorded on the ECG in this case?
a. QRS complex widening
*b. ST segment elevation
c. Increase in the amplitude of the R wave
d. Prolongation of the PQ interval
e. Increase in the amplitude of the P wave
 
180. What is an organization as an object of management?
*a. A collection of people, resources, and processes that work together to achieve specific goals
b. Financial structure
c. For-profit enterprise
d. An institution established for a specific purpose
e. Statutory object
 
181. A patient diagnosed with myocardial infarction is prescribed 2500 U of heparin 4 times a day subcutaneously. What amount of heparin should be drawn into a 2 ml syringe for a single injection if 1 ml of heparin contains 5000 U?
a. 0.4 ml
b. 0.2 ml
c. 0.3 ml
*d. 0.5 ml
e. 0.1 ml
 
182. Specify the form of primary health care, providing which, a general practitioner takes care of members of attached families throughout their lives and bears full responsibility for their health.
a. Emergency (fast)
b. Pediatric
c. Special
d. Advisory
*e. Family
 
183. Specify the method for determining visual acuity.
a. Biomicroscopy
b. Ophthalmoscopy
c. Perimetry
d. Tonometry
*e. Visometry
 
184. A month after birth, during examination of the hip joints of a child, the following were found: limitation of leg extension in the hip joints, shortening of one of the limbs, asymmetry of the folds, positive symptoms of Ortolani and Barlow. For which pathology are the indicated clinical manifestations characteristic?
*a. Congenital dislocation of the hip
b. Chondropathies
c. Clubfoot
d. Chondrodystrophies
e. Hip dysplasia
 
185. A 42-year-old man, who has had arterial hypertension for 8 years, after experiencing emotional stress felt dry mouth, sharp pain in the back of the head and in the heart area. Objectively observed: consciousness preserved, hand tremor, face hyperemic, skin moist, polyuria. BP --- 210/100 mm Hg. art., pulse --- 110 beats/min., no motor and sensory disorders were detected, blood glucose --- 4.5 mmol/l. What complication has developed in the patient?
*a. Hypertensive crisis
b. Ischemic stroke
c. Hemorrhagic stroke
d. Diabetic (hyperglycemic) coma
e. Hypoglycemic coma
 
186. A patient has been diagnosed with a closed chest injury, tension (valvular) pneumothorax. Specify the treatment tactics in this case.
*a. Pleural drainage
b. Applying a pressure bandage
c. Mechanical ventilation
d. Thoracotomy
e. Tracheostomy
 
187. What assistance should be provided to a woman in labor in the third stage of labor if the placenta has not separated after the administration of uterotonics and bleeding continues?
a. Monitor bleeding
b. Prepare the woman for laparotomy
c. Sew up the perineal tears
*d. Perform manual separation and removal of the afterbirth
e. Inspect the birth canal for integrity
 
188. A patient is prescribed complex treatment for decompensated chronic heart failure. Which drug can cause cough as the most common side effect from the respiratory system?
*a. Enalapril
b. Asparkam
c. Furosemide
d. Veroshpiron
e. Carvedilol
 
189. A child has developed seizures due to meningitis. What anticonvulsant drug is used in emergency care in this case?
a. 10% calcium gluconate solution
b. 40% glucose solution
c. 2% suprastin solution
*d. 0.5% diazepam solution
e. 2% papaverine solution
 
190. The insurance company independently regulates the cost of the insurance policy under certain conditions. Which of the following persons will be charged the highest cost of a voluntary health insurance policy for musculoskeletal injuries?
a. Driver aged 23
b. A 72-year-old seller
*c. Athlete aged 19 years
d. A 54-year-old teacher
e. A 44-year-old doctor
 
191. A 67-year-old female patient complains of a sharp throbbing headache in the occipital region, tinnitus, nausea, dizziness, dry mouth, body tremors, frequent urination. Objectively observed: pulse is tense, 84/min, blood pressure - 170/100 mm Hg. What drug should be used to provide emergency care?
a. Nitroglycerin
b. Bisoprolol
c. Amlodipine
d. Enalapril
*e. Captopril
 
192. A 20-year-old female patient complains of profuse vaginal discharge with an unpleasant "fishy" odor. Results of gynecological examination: the vaginal mucosa is pale pink, vaginal discharge is milky white, adheres to the vaginal walls, vaginal pH is 5.0. What pathology are these symptoms typical of?
a. Genital herpes
b. Chlamydia
c. Candidal vulvovaginitis
d. Trichomoniasis
*e. Bacterial vaginosis
 
193. A two-month-old boy, starting from the 3rd week of life, has repeated daily vomiting of a large amount of food. Vomiting is ejected in a "fountain" manner, its quantity exceeds the portion of food for a single feeding. Objectively observed: a sharp decrease in body weight, the skin is pale, dry, wrinkled, subcutaneous fat is absent on the trunk and extremities. During abdominal examination, peristalsis of the stomach is observed, resembling an "hourglass". For which pathology are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Duodenal ulcer disease
b. Pylorospasm
c. Acute gastritis
d. Peptic ulcer disease
*e. Pyloric stenosis
 
194. A two-year-old child who has been ill with acute respiratory viral infections for five days suddenly developed a hoarse voice and a rough "barking" cough at night, accompanied by noisy breathing with difficulty in breathing. Objectively observed: tachypnea, cyanosis of the skin, retraction of the supra- and subclavian fossae and intercostal spaces during inspiration. What pathological condition has developed in the child?
a. Acute obstructive bronchitis
*b. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
c. Paratonsillar abscess
d. Foreign body airway obstruction
e. Bronchial asthma attack
 
195. Indicate the correct sequence of stages in the life cycle of any organization.
a. Birth, adolescence, childhood, maturity, aging, bankruptcy (recovery)
b. Bankruptcy (recovery), birth, childhood, adolescence, maturity, aging
*c. Birth, childhood, youth, maturity, aging, bankruptcy (recovery)
d. Birth, childhood, adolescence, maturity, bankruptcy (recovery)
e. Birth, childhood, youth, aging, maturity, bankruptcy (recovery)
 
196. During an intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone, a child's general condition suddenly worsened, a rash similar to urticaria appeared on the body, blood pressure decreased, expiratory shortness of breath appeared, and the child fainted. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical of?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Asthmatic status
c. Allergic dermatitis
*d. Anaphylactic shock
e. Hyperglycemic coma
 
197. A patient was admitted to the emergency department in an unconscious state. Objectively observed: skin is pale, dry, eyeballs are soft when pressed, deep noisy breathing (Kussmaul breathing), a sharp smell of acetone is felt from the mouth, blood pressure --- 95/65 mm Hg., pulse --- 110 beats/min, weak, abdomen is soft, enlarged liver is palpated. What emergency condition has developed in the patient?
a. Acute cerebrovascular accident
b. Hepatic coma
*c. Diabetic (hyperglycemic) coma
d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Anaphylactic shock
 
198. A patient was hospitalized to the therapeutic department with symptoms of urolithiasis. During the interview, it became known that the patient had a pacemaker installed. Which method of diagnosing urinary tract diseases is contraindicated for the patient, taking into account the anamnestic data?
a. Excretory urography
b. Ultrasound examination
c. Urethrocystoscopy
d. Survey urography
*e. Magnetic resonance imaging
 
199. A patient is tentatively diagnosed with shigellosis. What specific laboratory diagnostic method is used to confirm the diagnosis?
*a. Bacteriological
b. Biochemical blood test
c. Biological
d. Blood glucose test
e. Complete blood count
 
200. A patient diagnosed with cholera is prescribed rehydration therapy. Indicate the effect of this type of therapy.
*a. Restores water and electrolyte balance
b. Bacteriostatic effect on the pathogen
c. Bactericidal effect on the pathogen
d. Has anti-allergic effect
e. Eliminates the manifestations of intoxication
 
201. The head nurse of the medical department monitors the implementation of previously defined tasks. Indicate its key aspects.
a. Creation of an organizational control structure
*b. Checking actual data, comparing it with planned data and identifying deviations
c. Assessment of professional knowledge and skills of employees
d. Formation of new tasks for the department
e. Correction of standards
 
202. A woman in labor with weak labor activity was hospitalized in the maternity ward. She was prescribed the hormone of the posterior pituitary gland --- oxytocin intravenously. Indicate the main purpose of using this medication.
a. Stopping postpartum uterine bleeding
*b. Increased rhythmic uterine contractions
c. Increased blood pressure
d. Lowering blood pressure
e. Increased tonic uterine contractions
 
203. A 74-year-old palliative patient who developed an acute cerebrovascular accident 14 days ago is continuing treatment in a home hospital setting. Which scale should the family nurse use when determining this patient's ability to self-care?
a. Norton
*b. Barthel
c. Glasgow
d. Berg
e. Waterloo
 
204. A 34-year-old patient was hospitalized to the hematology department with suspected chronic myeloid leukemia. What are the objective signs most characteristic of this disease?
*a. Splenomegaly
b. Trophic ulcers on the lower extremities
c. Swelling in the lower extremities
d. Lymphadenopathy
e. Ulcerative-necrotic angina
 
205. A six-year-old child fainted during a laboratory examination. What body position should be given to the child when providing emergency first aid to the child?
a. Lying down, with the head of the bed elevated
b. On the right side
*c. Lying down, with lower limbs elevated
d. On the left side
e. Semi-sitting, with lower limbs lowered
 
206. A patient with sepsis suddenly developed severe weakness, adynamia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Objectively observed: consciousness is impaired, pulse is thready - 110 beats/min, blood pressure - 60/40 mm Hg. Laboratory tests revealed hyponatremia, hypochloremia, hyperkalemia, and hypoglycemia. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Hypothyroid coma
b. Myocardial infarction
*c. Adrenal crisis
d. Hypoglycemic coma
e. Hypopituitarism
 
207. Which entity primarily determines the organizational structure of a healthcare facility?
*a. The owner of the establishment
b. Director General
c. By the work team
d. Ministry of Health of Ukraine
e. Executive Director
 
208. A family doctor has made a preliminary diagnosis of hypothyroidism and referred him to an endocrinology clinic. What type of medical care will he receive at this clinic?
a. Urgent
*b. Tertiary
c. Secondary
d. Primary
e. Emergency
 
209. An emergency medical team is performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation on a man who has been injured in a road accident. Specify the criterion for the effectiveness of artificial ventilation and closed heart massage at the stage of basic life support.
a. Saturation level less than 50%
b. Increasing facial cyanosis
*c. Constriction of the pupils
d. Increasing cyanosis of the extremities
e. Saturation level - 75%
 
210. A four-year-old child has fever, intense headache, repeated vomiting, hyperesthesia to all types of stimuli, rigidity of the occipital muscles, positive Brudzinski and Kernig signs. What additional examination is necessary to establish the diagnosis?
a. Ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs
b. Dopplerography of cerebral vessels
c. Rheoencephalography
d. Electroencephalography
*e. Lumbar puncture
 
211. A 29-year-old patient has been complaining of pain in the left half of the chest for 2.5 weeks, dry cough, shortness of breath, fever and severe weakness. Objectively observed: body temperature - 39.6^oC, the left half of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing, shortened percussion sound and weakened vesicular breathing on the left. X-ray: large-focal compaction of the lung tissue (round shadow) in the lower lobe of the left lung. For which disease are these clinical manifestations and the result of the X-ray examination characteristic?
a. Pleural empyema
b. Exudative pleurisy
*c. Lung abscess
d. Dry pleurisy
e. Acute bronchitis
 
212. A 39-year-old patient complains of a palpitations attack that occurred for the first time on the background of complete health. Objectively observed: RR --- 3 in 10 sec, HR --- 30 beats in 10 sec, perfusion is preserved. Cardiomonitoring results: absence of P wave, QRS complexes are regular, not expanded. What measures should be taken to start providing emergency care to the patient?
*a. Vagus tests
b. Administration of amiodarone
c. ATP administration
d. Use of metoprolol
e. Cardioversion
 
213. In a four-year-old child, laboratory examination of a scraping from the perianal folds revealed helminth eggs. Specify the drug used to treat this type of helminthiasis.
a. Cefixime (cefixime)
b. Fucis (fluconazole)
*c. Wormil (albendazole)
d. Nifuroxazide
e. Loratadine
 
214. A 45-year-old patient complains of a prolonged cough, weight loss, general weakness, and night sweats. Specify the main criterion for confirming the diagnosis: pulmonary tuberculosis.
a. Positive Mantoux test
b. Leukocytosis
*c. Detection of the tuberculosis pathogen in sputum
d. Positive quantiferon test
e. Radiological changes in the chest organs
 
215. Which of the following conditions is transient for a newborn baby?
a. Hemolytic jaundice
*b. Physiological weight loss
c. Cardiovascular failure
d. Renal failure
e. Respiratory failure
 
216. Indicate the leading negative factor contributing to the development of intestinal infections in natural disaster zones.
a. -
b. Limited access to health services
c. Overburdened health systems
d. The effect of chemicals on the functioning of the body
*e. Production of food products that do not meet sanitary standards
 
217. A 47-year-old man was prescribed a combination therapy for hypertension and dyslipidemia. After two weeks of treatment, the patient noticed the appearance of pronounced dense edema in the feet and lower legs. Which of the following drugs most likely caused this side effect?
a. Indapamide
b. Atorvastatin
c. Perindopril
d. Acetylsalicylic acid
*e. Amlodipine
 
218. What type of uterine fibroids requires urgent surgical intervention?
*a. Submucosal nodule emerging
b. Submucosal node on a broad base
c. Subserous node on a broad base
d. Intramural uterine myoma
e. Multinodular uterine fibroids
 
219. A five-year-old child is unconscious. Indicate the duration of checking her breathing according to the principle "I hear. I see. I feel" during emergency care.
a. Within 60 seconds
b. No more than 2 minutes
c. Within 30 seconds
d. Within 5 minutes
*e. No more than 10 seconds
 
220. A 30-year-old patient developed convulsions after insulin administration, lost consciousness, pale skin, cold sticky sweat, dilated pupils, and rigidity of the limb muscles. What pathological condition has the patient developed?
*a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Hyperglycemic coma
c. Collapse
d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Epileptic seizure
 
221. Specify the drug used to treat hyperthermia in children at the prehospital stage.
a. Diazepam
b. Suprastin
c. Acetylsalicylic acid
*d. Ibuprofen
e. Calcium gluconate
 
222. A 37-year-old man with type 1 diabetes mellitus who did not eat on time after an insulin injection suddenly developed feelings of hunger, tremor of the fingers, anxiety, severe sweating, and headache. Objectively observed: consciousness is preserved, skin is pale, cold sweat, pulse and blood pressure are within normal limits. What pre-medical care measures should be provided to the patient in this case?
a. Provide a horizontal position with slightly raised lower limbs
b. Provide access to fresh air, perform alkaline inhalation
*c. Offer to consume glucose-containing foods (sugar water, sugar cube, juice)
d. Warm the patient, massage the peripheral areas of the body
e. Offer to drink hypertonic saline solution
 
223. Name one of the managerial functions of nursing management that contributes to ensuring high-quality medical care and productive work of medical personnel.
a. Population health assessment and control
*b. Effective communication, conflict resolution, resource management, and team building
c. Provision of health care services
d. Carrying out preventive measures and dispensary monitoring of the health status of the population
e. -
 
224. During the examination of a 35-year-old man injured in an industrial explosion, the following were found: AVPU --- U, RR --- 28/min, significant burns of the upper respiratory tract, pulse --- 100 beats/min, attempts at intubation to restore airway patency were unsuccessful. Which of the methods of restoring airway patency is the most optimal in this case?
a. Tracheotomy
b. Laryngeal mask
c. Combitube
*d. Conicopuncture
e. Ambu bag ventilation
 
225. What is a standard of medical care, and what is its significance for practical activities in a medical institution?
a. Document allowing the performance of medical activities in medical institutions
b. Agreement between the patient and the medical institution regarding the conditions and scope of medical care
c. Informational document
d. Facility activity report, including information on medical procedures performed
*e. A set of accepted norms and standards that determine the quality and scope of medical services
 
226. What is the main clinical symptom characteristic of dry pleurisy?
a. Expiratory dyspnea
*b. Chest pain that worsens with breathing and coughing
c. Glassy sputum produced during coughing
d. Dry cough accompanied by runny nose and lacrimation
e. Hemoptysis
 
227. A six-year-old child suddenly developed a body temperature of 39.5°C. Which drug is strictly contraindicated for use in children under 15 years of age to reduce high body temperature?
a. -
b. Paracetamol
*c. Acetylsalicylic acid
d. Mefenamic acid
e. Ibuprofen
 
228. A 22-year-old woman on the 7th day after childbirth complains of pain in the left breast, an increase in body temperature to 38.6°C. Objectively observed: the breast is hyperemic, an infiltrate is palpated in the upper-outer quadrant. For which pathology are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Breast adenomas
b. Beshykh
*c. Lactational mastitis
d. Mastopathy
e. Breast cancer
 
229. During an external obstetric examination of a woman at 36 weeks of pregnancy, it was found that the fetal heartbeat was heard on the right below the navel. Determine the position, type of position, and presentation of the fetus.
a. Transverse position, I position, front view
b. Longitudinal position, II position, anterior view, breech presentation
c. Longitudinal position, II position, posterior view, breech presentation
d. Longitudinal position, I position, posterior view, breech presentation
*e. Longitudinal position, second position, anterior view, cephalic presentation
 
230. The patient complains of intense pain in the right hypochondrium with irradiation to the right scapula. The day before there was vomiting, which did not bring relief. Objectively observed: body temperature 37.8$^oC$, during palpation the abdomen is moderately distended, tense and painful in the right hypochondrium, moderate tension of the abdominal wall muscles in the right hypochondrium, Ortner's symptom is positive. For which pathology are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Acute pancreatitis
*b. Acute cholecystitis
c. Acute appendicitis
d. Perforating stomach ulcer
e. Intestinal obstruction
 
231. What formula is used to calculate the approximate body weight of a child aged 2-11 years? (n --- number of years)
a. $80 + 2n$
b. $75 + 5n$
c. $37 + 2n$
*d. $10 + 2n$
e. $11 + 2n$
 
232. A worker in a ceramics workshop complains of an unpleasant taste in the mouth, cramp-like abdominal pain, and constipation that does not go away after taking laxatives. Objectively observed: the skin of the face is pale grayish, a grayish-lilac stripe is found along the edge of the gums near the front teeth. In the blood: anemia, reticulocytosis, basophilic granularity of erythrocytes, increased bilirubin content. In the urine, the porphyrin content is increased. Chronic poisoning with which substance most likely developed in the man?
*a. Lead
b. Carbon tetrachloride
c. Benzene
d. Manganese
e. Mercury
 
233. A 42-year-old man was injured in the chest with a sharp object during a fight. During the examination, a wound was found in the projection of the 9th intercostal space along the scapular line on the left; air and blood splashes are released from the wound with noise during inhalation. What emergency aid should be provided to the patient first?
a. Administer painkillers
b. Perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation
c. Apply an aseptic dressing
d. Refer to a doctor immediately
*e. Apply an occlusive dressing
 
234. What is the name of the ordered set of relationships in an organization in terms of the transfer of management functions and the organization of executive processes?
a. Communication process
b. Produced label
c. Management vertical
d. Executive discipline
*e. Management structure
 
235. The senior nurse of the outpatient clinic draws up the work schedule of subordinate employees. Indicate the workload standards for a general practice nurse in accordance with the current legislation of Ukraine.
a. 800 people in the city, 400 people in the countryside
b. 900 people in the city, 800 people in the countryside
*c. 750 people in the city, 600 people in the countryside
d. 450 people in the city, 150 people in the countryside
e. 1500 people in the city, 1200 people in the countryside
 
236. A 55-year-old man suddenly developed a severe headache, dizziness, vomiting, numbness and weakness of the right half of the body. Objectively observed: hyperemia and asymmetry of the face, blood pressure - 170/120 mm Hg. What pathological condition has developed in the man?
a. Neuritis of the facial nerve
b. Acute meningitis
*c. Acute cerebral blood flow disturbance
d. Migraine status
e. Hypertensive crisis
 
237. A 49-year-old patient after physical overload felt a sudden rapid heartbeat, discomfort in the chest, dizziness, a feeling of lack of air. Objectively observed: pulse - 140 beats/min, rhythmic, pendulum-like, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. Art. An attack of paroxysmal tachycardia was diagnosed. What specific technique, which reflexively increases the tone of the vagus nerve, is used during the provision of first aid?
a. Defibrillation
b. Transesophageal electrical stimulation
c. Catheter ablation
d. Electrical defibrillation
*e. Valsalva maneuver
 
238. A patient in the nephrology department has signs of chronic renal and heart failure. What independent nursing intervention should the nurse plan in this case?
a. Hemodialysis
b. Bladder catheterization
c. Use of diuretics
*d. Monitoring water balance
e. Ultrasound of the kidneys and urinary tract
 
239. A 57-year-old man complains of pain in the heart area of a compressive nature with irradiation to the left shoulder, which occurs during physical exertion and does not go away after taking nitroglycerin. Objectively observed: skin and visible mucous membranes are pale, heart tones are weakened, rhythmic, blood pressure --- 90/50 mm Hg. ECG results: ST segment above the isoline, coronary Q wave. For which pathology is this characteristic?
a. Endocarditis
*b. Myocardial infarction
c. Rheumatic heart disease
d. Pericarditis
e. Myocarditis
 
240. What elements of management in medicine ensure the implementation of strategic plans and the achievement of organizational goals?
a. Resources for medical research
*b. Principles, methods and means of management to achieve the goal
c. Clinical protocols and regulatory requirements
d. Medical services and their quality
e. Medical training programs for students
 
241. Due to incomplete obstruction of the larynx by a foreign body, the victim has partial airway obstruction, which is accompanied by insufficient gas exchange. What emergency care should be provided to the patient?
a. Provide drainage position
b. Provide a stable lateral position
c. Apply the Safar technique
*d. Apply the Heimlich maneuver
e. Perform artificial ventilation of the lungs
 
242. A 49-year-old patient complains of palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness and intense retrosternal pain that lasts 40 minutes and does not decrease after taking nitroglycerin. Objectively observed: pulse - 96 beats/min, arrhythmic, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. Preliminary diagnosis: acute coronary syndrome. What examination should be performed on the patient first of all to clarify the diagnosis?
a. Phonocardiography
*b. Electrocardiography
c. Tomography
d. Dopplerography
e. Echocardiography
 
243. A 64-year-old woman complains of pain in the hip joints, limited movement, and gait disturbance (limping). History: chronic gastritis. Which nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug is recommended for the patient's treatment, taking into account the patient's history?
a. Indomethacin
*b. Meloxicam
c. Diclofenac
d. Metamizole
e. Naproxen
 
244. After stress, the patient developed severe weakness, pain in the heart area with irradiation to the left shoulder and arm for 30 minutes and does not go away after taking nitroglycerin. Objectively observed: pale skin, blood pressure --- 100/60 mm Hg, pulse --- 90 beats/min, arrhythmic. What drug should be used for antithrombotic purposes in this case?
a. Papaverine
b. Paracetamol
c. Nifedipine
*d. Aspirin
e. Atenolol
 
245. A five-year-old child, with acute respiratory viral infection, suddenly developed hoarseness, a "barking" cough, noisy breathing, and inspiratory shortness of breath at night. What emergency condition are these symptoms typical of?
a. Acute vascular insufficiency
b. Status asthmaticus
*c. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
d. Pulmonary edema
e. Bronchial asthma attack
 
246. A patient is being treated in a gastroenterology department with a diagnosis of liver cirrhosis. What clinical symptoms indicate a syndrome of cytolysis and hepatocellular insufficiency?
a. Ascites, <<jellyfish head>>, liver enlargement
b. Nausea, vomiting, constipation
c. Itching of the skin, discoloration of urine and feces
d. Nosebleeds, hemorrhages, <<leopard skin>>
*e. Telangiectasias, hepatic palms, jaundice, gynecomastia, fever
 
247. Which healthcare financing system, from the point of view of organizational and financial features, is decentralized, its financial resources are formed on the principle of mandatory contributions from entrepreneurs, working citizens and state subsidies?
a. Chinese
*b. German
c. English
d. Ukrainian
e. American
 
248. A man often experiences syncope and shortness of breath during physical exertion. History: chronic rheumatic heart disease. Objectively observed: pallor of the skin, synchronous pulsation of the carotid arteries with head shaking, blood pressure - 180/50 mm Hg. What heart disease are these symptoms typical of?
a. Tricuspid valve insufficiency
b. Mitral valve insufficiency
c. Ventricular septal defect
d. Mitral valve stenosis
*e. Aortic valve insufficiency
 
249. The patient has severe drooling, burns around the mouth, a hoarse voice, takes a "puffed up" position, complains of severe headache and pain in the throat and behind the sternum. These symptoms are typical of poisoning with which substance?
a. Hydrogen peroxide
*b. Vinegar
c. Potassium permanganate
d. Methanol
e. Ethanol
 
250. A 38-year-old female patient has symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. What hormone level should be tested in this case?
a. Insulin
b. Adrenocorticotropic hormone
c. Somatotropic
d. Cortisol
*e. Thyrotropin
 
251. A patient in the therapeutic department suddenly developed pale skin, swelling of the lips and eyelids, frequent shallow breathing, a weak, frequent pulse, weakened heart tones, blood pressure - 85/60 mm Hg. What pathological condition has developed in the patient during parenteral administration of a cephalosporin antibiotic?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Pulmonary edema
c. Angina attack
d. Bronchial asthma attack
e. Collapse
 
252. In the case of which type of management, its links mainly correspond to the links of the production process, between which simple and clear relationships are established?
*a. Linear
b. Line-staff
c. Functional
d. Divisional
e. Matrix
 
253. Specify the simplest management structure, which is characterized by the fact that each division of the organization reports directly to one manager, who exercises comprehensive and general control over the organization's activities.
a. Horizontal
*b. Linear
c. Matrix
d. Straight
e. Functional
 
254. The child does not cry after birth, the skin is cyanotic, the heart rate is 80 beats/min, reflexes and muscle tone are reduced. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was immediately started. What indicator indicates the effectiveness of cardiopulmonary resuscitation?
a. Pupil dilation
*b. Respiration recovery
c. Absence of pulse on the carotid arteries
d. Areflexia
e. Bradycardia
 
255. Specify the name of the scale used to objectively assess the patient's state of consciousness, which is used mainly in cases of traumatic brain injuries.
a. Apgar
b. Norton
c. Barthel
*d. Glasgow
e. Frankel
 
256. Which type of helminthiasis is characterized by the following clinical manifestations: general weakness, subfebrile body temperature, abdominal pain, nausea, bowel disorders, and prolonged dry cough?
a. Early stage of opisthorchiasis
*b. Migratory stage of ascariasis
c. Intestinal stage of ascariasis
d. Late stage of opisthorchiasis
e. -
 
257. Specify the method of administering tuberculin during the Mantoux test.
a. Sublingually
b. Orally
c. Intramuscularly
*d. Intradermally
e. Subcutaneously
 
258. An eight-month-old child diagnosed with rickets suddenly had an attack of laryngospasm while crying, accompanied by a short-term cessation of breathing and subsequent loud inhalation ("cock's cry"). What drug is pathogenetically justified in this case?
a. 0.1% adrenaline solution
b. 2% suprastin solution
*c. 10% calcium gluconate solution
d. 50% analgin solution
e. 20% glucose solution
 
259. A 53-year-old woman with arterial hypertension is prescribed a combination of antihypertensive drugs: a long-acting angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a thiazide-like diuretic. Specify these drugs.
*a. Perindopril and indapamide
b. Captopril and indapamide
c. Perindopril and hydrochlorothiazide
d. Captopril and hydrochlorothiazide
e. Enalapril and hydrochlorothiazide
 
260. A ten-year-old girl has a fever of 38.8°C, chills, general weakness, loss of appetite, and vomiting that does not bring relief. During an objective examination, the following were found: moderate severity of the condition, sharp abdominal pain in the right hypochondrium, positive Murphy and Kerr symptoms. What is the emergency tactic in this case?
*a. Urgently hospitalize to the surgical department
b. Establish outpatient follow-up
c. Urgently hospitalize to the infectious disease department
d. Apply an ice pack to the lower abdomen
e. Apply a medical heating pad to the right hypochondrium area
 
261. What are the main emergency measures taken in the event of an outbreak of a particularly dangerous infection to control the emergency?
*a. Isolation of a sick patient and provision of necessary medical care
b. Laboratory diagnosis of the disease
c. Installation of armed guards around the perimeter of the quarantine area
d. ---
e. Sampling of soil, air, water, food, contaminated areas and various objects
 
262. A one and a half year old child developed a "barking" cough, restlessness, and a hoarse voice at night. Objectively observed: severe condition, pale skin, perioral cyanosis, labored breathing, participation of accessory muscles in the act of breathing, body temperature - 37.7°C. For which disease are these clinical manifestations typical?
a. Bronchial asthma
b. Pulmonary tuberculosis
*c. Acute stenosing laryngotracheitis
d. Acute obstructive bronchitis
e. Community-acquired pneumonia
 
263. Specify the main method of quality control of medical care at the level of a healthcare facility.
a. Analysis of financial reports of medical institutions
b. Patient satisfaction assessment
c. Monitoring the number of health workers
d. Conducting sociological surveys
*e. Analysis of medical records
 
264. An infant with pneumonia has developed symptoms of pulmonary edema due to excessive fluid therapy. What position should the child be placed in during emergency care?
a. Lying on the right side
b. Horizontal, with slightly raised lower limbs
c. Lying on the left side
*d. Sitting, semi-sitting
e. Lying on your stomach
 
265. A patient with a diagnosis of duodenal ulcer complains of weakness, shortness of breath during minor physical exertion, and taste distortion (desire to eat chalk). Objectively observed: pallor and trophic changes of the skin. In the blood: hemoglobin --- 90 g/l, erythrocytes --- $3.3 · 10^{12$/l, CP --- 0.75. What complication has the patient developed?
a. Aplastic anemia
*b. Iron deficiency anemia
c. Polycythemia vera (Vaquez disease)
d. Hemolytic anemia
e. Erythremia
 
266. A family doctor has made a preliminary diagnosis of hypothyroidism and referred the patient to an endocrinology clinic. What type of medical care will he receive at this medical facility?
a. Emergency
b. Primary
*c. Tertiary
d. Urgent
e. Secondary
 
267. A nurse became infected with coronavirus during the COVID-19 pandemic while performing her professional duties. The disease was severe and caused rapid (within a year) disability. What amount of insurance benefits should be provided to this medical worker in accordance with the current legislation of Ukraine?
a. In 150 times the average wage
*b. At least 300 times the subsistence minimum
c. At least 100 times the subsistence minimum
d. In 500 times the average wage
e. At least 200 times the subsistence minimum
 
268. Which of the following measures is a priority when providing emergency care to a patient with acute myocardial infarction in the prehospital stage?
a. Ensuring a comfortable body position
b. Introduction of potassium-containing foods into the diet
c. Bladder catheterization
*d. Pain reduction
e. Sedation therapy
 
269. A 37-year-old patient suddenly developed severe general weakness, a feeling of heat and flushing of the face, chest tightness and difficulty breathing, ringing in the ears, headache, and skin itching after an antibiotic injection. Objectively observed: pulse --- 100 beats/min, blood pressure --- 70/30 mm Hg. What emergency condition has developed in the patient?
*a. Anaphylactic shock
b. Epidermal necrolysis
c. Cardiogenic shock
d. Hives
e. Angioedema
 
270. To detect which of the following diseases is neonatal screening performed on all newborns in the first days of life?
a. Tuberculosis, hepatitis
b. Hepatitis, rubella
c. Measles, rubella
d. Poliomyelitis, mumps
*e. Phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism
 
271. A four-year-old child has a nosebleed. Which of the following emergency measures should be applied in the prehospital stage?
a. Place the child in a horizontal position
b. Tilt the child's head back
c. Perform alkaline inhalation
d. Apply heat to the bridge of the nose
*e. Press the wing of the nose against its septum with your finger
 
272. A patient has developed an attack of cardiac asthma on the background of myocardial infarction. What emergency method can be used to relieve the small circle of blood circulation in order to reduce blood flow to the heart?
a. Collar zone massage
b. Applying an ice pack to the calf muscles
c. Oxygen therapy
*d. Applying venous tourniquets to the lower extremities
e. Conducting alkaline inhalations
 
273. What foods should be excluded from the patient's diet 3-5 days before a stool test for occult blood?
a. Vegetables
*b. Meat
c. Sweets
d. Bread
e. Eggs
 
274. What stage of the organization's development life cycle is associated with meeting the needs of a new consumer and occupying a free market niche?
a. Childhood
*b. Birth
c. Recovery
d. Youth
e. Maturity
 
275. On the second day of life, a newborn baby has yellow-brick urine, which leaves a reddish mark on the diaper. What transient condition are these symptoms typical of?
a. Physiological erythema
b. Physiological jaundice
c. Erythema toxicum
d. Physiological hyperthermia
*e. Uric acid infarction
 
276. A patient is diagnosed with paralytic ileus. What drug is used to restore intestinal peristalsis?
a. Diphenhydramine
b. Diazepam
*c. Prozerin
d. Drotaverine
e. Suprastin
 
277. A ten-year-old child diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus did not eat after an insulin injection. After some time, she suddenly felt hungry, her limbs trembled, and her skin became moist. What measures should be taken to begin providing emergency care to the child at the prehospital stage?
a. Immediately hospitalize the child in a hospital
b. Administer 25% magnesium sulfate solution intramuscularly
*c. Give easily digestible carbohydrates (sugar, sweet tea)
d. Administer subcutaneously 0.182% adrenaline solution
e. Administer intravenous dexamethasone
 
278. What special transport splint is used to immobilize a limb in case of a femur fracture?
a. Filberg
b. Plaster cast
c. Elansky
d. Cramer
*e. Dieterichs
 
279. Specify the main clinical symptom that is characteristic of dry pleurisy.
a. Hemoptysis
b. Distant wheezing wheezing
*c. Chest pain when breathing
d. Expiratory dyspnea
e. Glassy sputum discharge
 
280. Which of the following should be performed first at the prehospital stage when providing emergency care to a patient with an open femoral fracture with femoral artery injury?
a. Apply an aseptic dressing to the wound
b. Carry out transport immobilization of the limb
*c. Apply an arterial tourniquet to the limb
d. Place the limb in a horizontal position
e. Infuse blood substitutes
 
281. Indicate the most effective factor influencing the formation of a manager.
a. Appearance
b. Higher education
c. Genetic characteristics
d. Personal life
*e. Active self-development
 
282. A 61-year-old patient complains of pain in the heart area of a compressive nature, radiating to the left shoulder and scapula and lasting about 5 minutes. Objectively observed: pulse - 88 beats/min, blood pressure - 140/95 mm Hg. What drug should be used first?
a. Analgin
b. Corvalol
c. Enalapril
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Prednisolone
 
283. Which section of a private medical organization's business plan addresses market risk, capital investment risk, and the availability of an insurance policy?
*a. 10
b. 9
p. 8
d. 2
e. 5
 
284. Indicate the main aspects of organization as a management function.
a. Developing long-term goals and directions for the organization, as well as establishing strategies and tactics to achieve these goals
b. Development of management decisions to achieve the goal of the organization as an entity
c. Planning the organization as an entity
*d. Designing the structure of the organization, distributing and coordinating work in order to achieve the goal of the organization as an entity
e. -
 
285. A patient receiving the cardiac glycoside drug digoxin has developed a worsening of his general condition, nausea, vomiting, and extrasystole. Which of the following is most likely to have caused these side effects?
a. Lowering blood pressure
b. Consumption of poor quality products
c. Insufficient dosage of cardiac glycosides
*d. Overdose of cardiac glycosides
e. Increased blood pressure
 
286. A 60-year-old patient is suspected of having chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. What noninvasive method is most effective for determining the degree of airway obstruction?
*a. Spirometry
b. Fluorography
c. Bronchography
d. Bronchoscopy
e. Peak flowmetry
 
287. Which of the following methods is the most effective for treating myocardial infarction in elderly patients?
a. Nitrates
*b. Stenting
c. Thrombolytic therapy
d. ---
e. Antiplatelet agents in combination with anticoagulants
 
288. What are the main resources used by the organization?
a. Human resources, capital, materials and information
b. Human resources, materials, technology and information
c. Human resources, capital, materials and technology
d. Human and material resources and technology
*e. Human resources, capital, materials, technology and information
 
289. What principle of determining the priority of cases in general terms is that within a given set, individual small parts show much greater significance than corresponds to their specific weight in this set, that is, 80% of the result is achieved due to 20% of the efforts spent by the manager on really important problems?
a. Eisenhower
*b. Pareto
c. Automation
d. ABC analysis
e. Pomodoro
 
290. A newborn baby (1 month old) has a cold abscess in the upper third of the left shoulder. What violation during the vaccination procedure caused this complication?
a. Aseptic conditions
b. Doses of immunobiological drug
*c. Method of vaccine administration
d. Selection of vaccination site
e. Vaccination period
 
291. A ten-year-old girl has a prolonged low-grade fever and weight loss. During an objective examination, the following were found: pallor of the skin and mucous membranes, a small petechial rash on the skin of the trunk and extremities, generalized lymph node enlargement, hepatosplenomegaly. In peripheral blood: anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia. In bone marrow punctate: total blast transformation. For which disease are these clinical and laboratory indicators characteristic?
a. Hydradenitis
b. Erythremia
*c. Acute leukemia
d. Fanconi anemia
e. Infectious mononucleosis
 
292. A 61-year-old patient complains of paroxysmal pain in the heart area (behind the sternum) of a squeezing nature, radiating to the left shoulder and scapula, lasting 5 minutes. Objectively observed: pulse --- 88 beats/min, blood pressure --- 140/95 mm Hg. What drug should be used first of all when providing emergency care to the patient?
a. Dexamethasone
b. Analgin
c. Prednisolone
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Enalapril
 
293. Three family members of different age groups complain of dizziness, tinnitus, nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, and headache. During the examination, it was found that despite the pronounced signs of respiratory failure, all patients have a bright pink color of the skin and mucous membranes. What pathological condition are these symptoms characteristic of?
a. Intestinal infection
b. Carbon dioxide poisoning
c. Heat stroke
*d. Carbon monoxide poisoning
e. FOS poisoning
 
294. A 28-year-old patient complains of general weakness, fever up to 38.8°C, cough with a small amount of sputum, pain under the right shoulder blade. Auscultation: breathing is weak, with a bronchial tone, moist rales are heard. What diagnostic method is advisable to perform first of all to establish the diagnosis?
a. Peak flowmetry
b. Fluorography of the OGK
c. Spirometry
*d. Radiography of the OGK
e. Bronchography
 
295. Specify the volume of diluted tuberculosis vaccine that is administered to healthy newborns on the 3rd-5th day of life in the absence of contraindications before discharge from the maternity hospital.
a. 0.5 ml
b. 2 ml
*c. 0.1 ml
d. 0.2 ml
e. 1 ml
 
296. In a three-year-old girl, the disease began acutely, with an increase in body temperature and the appearance of a small pale pink spotty-papular rash on the face, which within a few hours spread to the entire body without any stages. There is no tendency for the rash to merge. Catarrhal symptoms (cough, runny nose) are weakly expressed. During examination, an enanthema in the form of small pale pink spots was detected on the mucous membrane of the soft palate, and an increase in the occipital, posterior cervical and parotid lymph nodes was observed. For which infectious disease are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
*a. Rubella
b. Chickenpox
c. Cora
d. Scarlet fever
e. Meningococcemia
 
297. What resources belong to the general characteristics of an organization?
a. Economic conditions, public organizations, international events, legislative acts, competitors, etc.
b. Horizontal division of labor (setting specific tasks)
c. Unique technologies, exclusive access to markets, intellectual property
*d. People, capital, materials, finance, technology, equipment, etc.
e. Vertical division of labor
 
298. A full-term newborn child developed jaundice on the 4th day of life. The child's condition is satisfactory. What transient (physiological) condition is observed in the child?
*a. Physiological jaundice
b. Toxic erythema
c. Physiological erythema
d. Pathological jaundice
e. Sexual crisis
 
299. A 39-year-old man complains of a rise in body temperature to 38.7°C, pain in the chest on the right side and increasing shortness of breath. Objectively observed: the right half of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. During percussion of the chest, dullness of percussion sound is determined below the 4th rib on the right. During auscultation in the lower parts of the right lung, respiratory sounds are not heard. For which disease are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Lung abscess
b. Bronchial asthma
*c. Exudative pleurisy
d. Pneumonia
e. Dry pleurisy
 
300. On the fourth day of life, a full-term newborn girl developed bloody-mucous discharge from the genital slit and symmetrical enlargement of the mammary glands, the skin over them was not changed. The child's general condition is satisfactory. What condition are these symptoms typical of?
a. Purulent mastitis
b. Uric acid infarction
*c. Sexual crisis
d. Catarrhal omphalitis
e. Vulvovaginitis
 
301. A 39-year-old man complains of a rise in body temperature to 38.7°C, pain in the right chest and severe shortness of breath, which is increasing. Objectively observed: the right half of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing. Percussion: dullness of percussion sound is observed on the right below the 4th rib. Auscultation: no respiratory sounds. For which disease are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Community-acquired pneumonia
*b. Exudative pleurisy
c. Lung abscess
d. Aspiration pneumonia
e. Dry pleurisy
 
302. In a patient with pneumonia, the body temperature rapidly decreased from 39.5°C to 37.0°C within a few hours. Objectively observed: consciousness is preserved, the patient is lethargic, apathetic, answers questions with effort, the skin and mucous membranes are pale, cold sticky sweat, cold extremities, shallow breathing, pulse - 98 beats/min, weak filling, blood pressure - 80/50 mm Hg. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Hypoglycemic coma
b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Acute heart failure
d. Acute respiratory failure
*e. Acute vascular insufficiency
 
303. Indicate the approximate age of a child who can focus well on bright objects, raises his head when lying on his stomach, makes small sounds ("coos"), smiles, and sleeps about 18-20 hours a day.
*a. 2 months
b. 8 months
c. 7 months
d. 5 months
e. 4 months
 
304. The senior nurse of the outpatient clinic draws up the work schedule of subordinate employees. Indicate the workload standards for a general practice nurse in accordance with the current legislation of Ukraine.
a. 450 people in the city, 150 people in the countryside
b. 800 people in the city, 400 people in the countryside
*c. 750 people in the city, 600 people in the countryside
d. 900 people in the city, 800 people in the countryside
e. 1500 people in the city, 1200 people in the countryside
 
305. A 35-year-old patient complains of weakness, low-grade fever, swelling under the eyes, and changes in urine color and quantity. His medical history shows that he had bacterial tonsillitis 10 days ago. What is the most informative examination for establishing the diagnosis?
a. Urine analysis according to Zimnytsky
b. Urine test for glucose
*c. Urine analysis according to Nechyporenko
d. Complete blood count
e. Biochemical blood test
 
306. Which of the following diseases requires detailed collection of information about the patient's family history?
*a. Hemophilia
b. Hemorrhagic vasculitis
c. Cirrhosis of the liver
d. Vitamin B_12 deficiency anemia
e. Iron deficiency anemia
 
307. Specify the tactics of the nurse at the prehospital stage if the patient shows signs of frostbite of the limb.
a. Rub the limb with snow
*b. Apply a dry aseptic dressing to the affected area
c. Immerse the limb in hot water
d. Apply an ointment bandage to the affected area
e. Elevate the limb
 
308. During a preventive examination of a ten-year-old girl, asymmetry of the angles of the shoulder blades and upper arms, asymmetry of the waist triangles, and curvature of the line of the spinous processes of the thoracic spine were detected. What pathology are these symptoms typical of?
a. Subacute stage of rickets
b. Lordosis of the thoracic spine
*c. Scoliosis of the thoracic spine
d. Kyphosis of the thoracic spine
e. Chondrodystrophies
 
309. Specify the name of the healthcare system (according to the author), which is based on the organization and financing of the industry from the state budget with strict centralized management and control by the state.
a. Eythoven
b. Hoechst
c. Bismarck
*d. Semashka
e. Beveridge
 
310. Specify the name of the structural unit of the medical center where qualified medical care is provided to patients in the absence of indications for inpatient treatment or in the impossibility of hospitalization or refusal of it.
a. Sanatorium
b. Hospice
c. Hospital
*d. Day hospital
e. Preventive medicine
 
311. A conflict is a disagreement between the views or interests of two or more people, groups, organizations, or states. List the main sources of group conflict.
a. Conservatism and excessive emotional displays of members of the organization
b. Psychological incompatibility, low culture and low level of professional training
c. Characteristic difference of group leaders
d. Low moral qualities and values of group members
*e. The presence of negative leaders and individuals with pronounced character accentuations in the group of similar members
 
312. An eight-year-old girl complains of a fever of up to 38.6°C, cramp-like abdominal pain without clear localization, false urges to defecate, frequent loose stools with mucus and streaks of blood. What disease are these symptoms typical of?
a. Cholera
*b. Shigellosis
c. Salmonellosis
d. Botulism
e. Typhoid fever
 
313. A 61-year-old woman, after emotional overload, felt a paroxysmal burning pain behind the sternum, radiating to the left shoulder blade and left half of the neck. Objectively observed: pulse - 78/min, blood pressure - 135/85 mm Hg. What drug should be used first to provide emergency care to the patient?
a. Gidazepam
b. Furosemide
c. Captopril
*d. Nitroglycerin
e. Ibuprofen
 
314. Which of the following symptoms are most characteristic of cholera?
a. Crampy abdominal pain, diarrhea, decreased visual acuity, difficulty swallowing
b. Liquid stools mixed with mucus and streaks of blood, body temperature 39$^oС$, abdominal pain
c. Nausea, vomiting, jaundice, pain in the calf muscles
d. Excessive, frothy, foul-smelling, greenish stools, fever, repeated vomiting
*e. Abundant, frequent (20-30 times a day) bowel movements in the form of <<rice broth>>, body temperature 36.2$^oС$
 
315. A 34-year-old patient with urolithiasis developed a sharp, paroxysmal pain in the lumbar region after physical exertion, radiating to the thigh and genitals. Which of the following should be performed first of all at the prehospital stage during emergency care for the patient?
a. Administer tramadol intravenously
b. Administer furosemide IM
c. Immerse the lower extremities in hot water
d. Place an ice pack on the lower back
*e. Place a hot heating pad on the lower back
 
316. What method of contraception should be recommended to a woman who has had unprotected sexual intercourse (without using any contraceptive) if no more than 48 hours have passed since the moment of intercourse?
a. Lactational amenorrhea
b. Calendar
*c. Postcoital
d. Symptothermal
e. Barrier
 
317. What type of activity deployment forms levels of management?
a. Coordination
*b. Vertical
c. Direct
d. Horizontal
e. Indirect
 
318. What type of management is characteristic of the post-reform period of the healthcare system in Ukraine?
a. Matrix
b. Market
c. Centralized
*d. Decentralized
e. Single person
 
319. A 24-year-old patient has a severe traumatic brain injury. Objectively observed: consciousness is absent (according to AVPU --- U), breathing is irregular --- 10/min with episodes of apnea, blood pressure --- 150/100 mm Hg, pulse --- 58 beats/min. The patient has an endotracheal tube installed. How to check the correctness of its placement?
a. Perform auscultation at 2 points (right and left lungs)
b. The endotracheal tube is always placed correctly and does not require assessment of correct placement.
c. ---
d. Correct positioning is assessed by effective chest excursion
*e. Perform auscultation at 3 points (epigastrium, right lung, left lung)
 
320. Specify the technical regulatory document that defines the requirements for providing medical care to a patient in the event of a specific disease, a specific syndrome, or in a specific situation.
a. Comprehensive standards
b. Recipe
c. Form
d. Technological standards
*e. Clinical protocol
 
321. The following are objectively observed in a male victim of a road accident: unconsciousness, spontaneous breathing (20/min), pulse - 68 beats/min. What measures should be taken to begin providing emergency care at the prehospital stage?
*a. Provide the victim with a stable (safe) lateral position
b. Begin cardiopulmonary resuscitation
c. Bring the lower jaw forward and upward
d. Measure blood pressure
e. Clean the mouth and check the airway
 
322. Name one of the main causes of myocardial infarction.
a. Rheumatoid arthritis
*b. Coronary artery thrombosis
c. Respiratory failure
d. Aortic aneurysm
e. Heart failure
 
323. A 52-year-old female patient complains of irritability, tearfulness, emotional lability, rapid heartbeat, weight loss, hand tremors, insomnia. Objectively observed: excessive sweating, deterioration of visual acuity, exophthalmos, body temperature - 37.4°C, arrhythmic heart tones, pulse - 116/min, blood pressure - 150/90 mm Hg. What pathological condition are these symptoms typical of?
a. Hypothyroidism
*b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Itsenko-Cushing's syndrome
d. Hypertensive crisis
e. Addisonian crisis
 
324. A 42-year-old patient with chronic hepatitis has endocrine disorders: gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, hair loss in the inguinal fossa and on the pubis. Which syndrome is this typical of?
a. Biliary dyskinesia
b. Dumping syndrome
c. Immune inflammation
*d. Liver failure
e. Painful
 
325. A six-month-old child has restlessness, poor sleep, increased sweating of the head (especially the back of the head), vasomotor excitability, and increased skin sensitivity. During objective examination, baldness of the back of the head and softening of the edges of the anterior fontanelle were detected. For which period of rickets are these symptoms characteristic?
*a. Primary
b. Rickets tetany
c. Residual phenomena
d. Convalescence
e. The beginning of the
 
326. The patient complains of spontaneous hemorrhages on the skin, uterine bleeding, general weakness, dizziness. Objectively observed: the skin has the appearance of "leopard skin". What group of drugs is used for pathogenetic therapy in this case?
*a. Glucocorticosteroids
b. Anticoagulants
c. Hemostatic
d. Antibiotics
e. Desensitizing
 
327. A newborn child developed an anaphylactic reaction after the administration of a vaccine. The nurse pricked the site of allergen injection with a 0.182% solution of adrenaline hydrochloride diluted in 5 ml of isotonic sodium chloride solution. What is the pharmacological effect of adrenaline in this case?
*a. Narrowing of blood vessels
b. Weakened intestinal motility
c. Relaxation of skeletal muscles
d. Increased myocardial contractions
e. Relaxation of bronchial muscles
 
328. A woman in her 32nd week of pregnancy has severe preeclampsia. What baseline blood pressure is one of the diagnostic criteria for this condition?
a. Systolic BP ≥ 140 mm Hg, diastolic BP ≥ 90 mm Hg.
b. Systolic BP ge 130 mm Hg, diastolic BP ge 80 mm Hg.
*c. Systolic BP ge 160 mm Hg, diastolic BP ge 110 mm Hg.
d. Systolic BP ge 120 mm Hg, diastolic BP ge 80 mm Hg.
e. Systolic BP ge 150 mm Hg, diastolic BP ge 100 mm Hg.
 
329. A nurse, on the doctor's order, provides emergency care to a patient with a hypertensive crisis. Which of the following medications are used in this case?
a. Raunatin, analgin
b. Seduksen, dopegit
c. Heparin, phenytoin
d. Isoptine, reserpine
*e. Nifedipine, furosemide
 
330. A patient with a circular plaster cast on his lower limb complains of severe pain in his leg. Objectively observed: the fingers of the plastered limb are cyanotic, swollen, and their sensitivity is reduced. Indicate the actions of the nurse in this case.
*a. Cut the plaster cast
b. Elevate the limb
c. Remove the plaster cast
d. Apply cold to the limb
e. Administer analgesics and antispasmodics
 
331. A 29-year-old man, after a bumpy ride, suddenly developed severe paroxysmal pain in the lumbar region on the left side, radiating to the genitals and thigh. Objectively observed: the patient is excited, tries to choose a comfortable body position to relieve pain, the skin is pale, heart tones are rhythmic, blood pressure is 135/80 mm Hg. Art., pulse is weak, 105/min, Pasternatsky's symptom is sharply positive on the left side. For which pathological condition are these symptoms characteristic?
a. Acute cholecystitis
b. Strangulated inguinal hernia
c. Hepatic colic
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. Renal colic
 
332. A 47-year-old man, after emotional overload, developed intense burning, squeezing pain behind the sternum, radiating to the left shoulder blade, not relieved by sublingual nitroglycerin, lasting more than 30 minutes and intensifying. Objectively observed: pale skin, covered with cold sweat, arrhythmia, shortness of breath. ECG monitoring results: ST segment elevation. In the blood: increased troponin I level. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Acute cerebrovascular accident
b. Acute vascular insufficiency
c. Atrial fibrillation
d. Hypertensive crisis
*e. Acute coronary syndrome
 
333. Which method of examining internal organs is one of the main objective methods of examining a patient?
a. Biochemical blood test
b. Ultrasound of the ENT
c. Stomach X-ray
*d. Percussion
e. Complete blood count
 
334. A 16-year-old boy was injured during a fall from a height. He complains of abdominal pain, more on the left, weakness, nausea. Objectively observed: pulse --- 102 beats/min, blood pressure --- 90/60 mm Hg, positive Ivanets-Kyvanets symptom. What measures should be taken to begin providing emergency care to the patient?
*a. Urgently hospitalize
b. Administer painkillers
c. Administer antispasmodics
d. Ventilator suspensions
e. Administer narcotic analgesics
 
335. A man has swelling of the lips, eyelids, and nose after a bee sting. Objectively observed: moderate severity, consciousness preserved, face swollen, palpebral fissures narrowed, blood pressure --- 110/70 mm Hg., pulse --- 70 beats/min, vesicular breathing in the lungs, no wheezing. What pathological condition has developed in the man?
*a. Quincke's edema
b. Serum sickness
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Hives
e. Systemic lupus erythematosus
 
336. Managers should develop qualities that ensure and shape an effective work style. What qualities should a manager not possess?
a. Leadership skills
b. Honesty
*c. Authoritarianism
d. High professionalism
e. Internal control
 
337. What are the main functions of management?
a. Analysis, planning, organization, control
b. Information collection, strategy development, analysis, control
*c. Strategic planning, organization, motivation, control
d. Analysis, planning, organization, motivation
e. Analysis, decision-making, organization of implementation, control
 
338. A five-year-old child has a nosebleed. What measures should be taken to provide emergency care to the child?
*a. Place the child in a semi-sitting position with the head slightly lowered.
b. Call an ENT doctor
c. Administer hemostatic agents intravenously
d. Place a heating pad on the bridge of the nose and the back of the head
e. Instill a 20% solution of sodium sulfacyl into the nose
 
339. While performing her professional duties, a nurse took a photo of her work on her phone and posted it on social media. The photo included the face of a patient who recognized himself and filed a complaint with the institution's administration. What type of liability does the nurse face after an internal investigation?
*a. Disciplinary
b. Administrative
c. Criminal
d. Material
e. Civil
 
340. After playing with small objects, a three-year-old child experiences attacks of prolonged painful "barking" cough, accompanied by shortness of breath and sometimes provoking vomiting. During coughing and crying, the child makes sounds similar to "slapping" (clapping), and cyanosis of the skin around the lips occurs. These symptoms are characteristic of obstruction of which part of the respiratory tract?
a. Pharynx
b. Nasal cavities
c. Bronchi
d. Larynx
*e. Trachea
 
341. An 18-year-old patient complains of a rise in body temperature to 38.5°C, symmetrical migrating pain in the knee and ankle joints, pain in the heart, a feeling of palpitations. Objectively observed: pulse - 106/min, rhythmic, blood pressure - 90/60 mm Hg. Art., auscultatively a rough systolic murmur is heard above the apex of the heart. From the anamnesis it is known that 2 weeks ago he had acute bacterial tonsillitis. The study of the level of which laboratory indicator in the blood is most appropriate in this case?
a. Troponin
b. alpha-1-antitrypsin
c. Rheumatoid factor
d. Serumucoid
*e. Antistreptolysin-O
 
342. What drug is used for active management of the third stage of labor in order to reduce the incidence of postpartum hemorrhage caused by uterine atony, as well as to reduce postpartum blood loss?
*a. Oxytocin
b. Vidanol
c. Castor oil
d. Folliculin
e. Hemotran
 
343. A 35-year-old woman, being in a stuffy room, suddenly fainted. Objectively observed: skin is pale, moist, extremities are cold, blood pressure - 90/70 mm Hg. Art., pulse is weak. What body position should be given to the patient when providing emergency first aid?
a. Lying on the left side
*b. Horizontal, with slightly raised lower limbs
c. Lying on the right side
d. Lying on your stomach
e. Horizontal, with the head of the bed raised 30°
 
344. A patient complains of pain in the stomach area associated with eating. The doctor suspects that he has a stomach ulcer. Which diagnostic procedure is the most informative for clarifying the diagnosis?
*a. Fiberoptic esophagogastroduodenoscopy
b. Stomach X-ray
c. Complete blood count
d. Magnetic resonance imaging
e. Ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs
 
345. A patient experienced regurgitation during transport. What is the medical term for this?
*a. Movement of gastric contents into the oral cavity without effort and reflexes characteristic of vomiting
b. ---
c. Sudden ejection of gastric contents through the mouth due to severe spasms of the abdominal and thoracic muscles
d. Unpleasant, painless, subjective feeling of needing to vomit
e. Sudden ejection of gastric contents through the mouth due to painful spasms of the stomach and esophagus
 
346. A four-year-old child has measles. On the 3rd day from the onset of the rash, the child's condition worsened, acute stenosing laryngotracheitis developed. During examination, breathing with retraction of the intercostal spaces, flaring of the nasal wings, inspiratory dyspnea, and a "barking" cough are observed. Indicate the stage of laryngeal stenosis.
a. IV --- stage of asphyxia
*b. II --- stage of subcompensated stenosis
c. II --- stage of uncompensated stenosis
d. ---
e. I --- compensation stage
 
347. A five-year-old child has developed anaphylactic shock due to a bee sting. Indicate the first-line drug used for emergency care in this case.
a. No-shpa (drotaverin)
b. Diazepam (seduxen)
c. Chloropyramine (Suprastin)
*d. Epinephrine (adrenaline)
e. Metamizole sodium (analgin)
 
348. A 34-year-old patient was prescribed a centrally acting antitussive as part of a complex therapy for a respiratory tract disease accompanied by a dry, unproductive, persistent cough. Specify this drug.
a. Mukaltin
b. Ambroxol
*c. Glaucine
d. Acetylcysteine
e. Euphyllin
 
349. In a newborn child born at a gestational age of 35 weeks, in the first minute of life there is a weak cry, irregular breathing movements, heart rate - 90/min, acrocyanosis, slight flexion (bending) of the limbs, a reflex reaction to suction of mucus from the upper respiratory tract is pronounced (the child coughs, sneezes). Assess the condition of the newborn child using the Apgar scale.
a. 8 points
b. 5 points
*c. 6 points
d. 7 points
e. 9 points
 
350. Indicate the frequency of chest compressions per minute during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in adults.
*a. 100-120
b. 130-140
pp. 60-70
d. 80-90
70-80 AD
 
351. An 18-year-old female patient complains of a rise in body temperature to 38.5°C, palpitations, shortness of breath during physical exertion, and a pale pink, migrating rash in the form of rings on the inner surface of the forearms. The rash does not rise above the skin surface, is not accompanied by itching, and turns pale when pressed. From the anamnesis, it is known that 2 weeks ago she had acute bacterial tonsillitis. For which disease are these symptoms typical?
a. Psoriasis
b. Hives
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
*d. Acute rheumatic fever
e. Simple contact dermatitis
 
352. A 60-year-old female patient developed a squeezing pain in the heart and behind the sternum after physical exertion, radiating to the lower jaw and lasting about 10 minutes. Taking analgesics and antispasmodics had no effect, but the symptoms decreased after sublingual use of nitroglycerin. For which disease are the indicated clinical manifestations characteristic?
*a. Angina pectoris
b. Intercostal neuralgia
c. Acute pericarditis
d. Myocarditis
e. Myocardial infarction
 
353. A 45-year-old female patient developed girdling pain in the upper abdomen, nausea, and loose stools with an unpleasant odor after eating spicy and fatty food. Preliminary diagnosis: exacerbation of chronic pancreatitis. What laboratory test should be performed to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Glucose
b. Urea
c. Bilirubin
d. Creatinine
*e. alpha-amylase
 
354. Classify the type of waste, in accordance with the order of the Ministry of Health of Ukraine No. 325, generated as a result of performing venipunctures in procedure rooms.
a. Specific
b. Household
c. Synthetic
d. Non-specific
*e. Medical
 
355. A 72-year-old female patient with a history of peptic ulcer suddenly developed nausea and vomiting of "coffee grounds". Objectively observed: pale skin, blood pressure --- 90/70 mm Hg, pulse --- 112 beats/min. What emergency condition has developed in the patient?
a. Perforation
b. Pyloric stenosis
*c. Gastrointestinal bleeding
d. Acute vascular insufficiency
e. Peritonitis
 
356. A 56-year-old man has objectively observed: unconsciousness, icteric skin, dilated pupils, no reaction to light, ascites. History: cirrhosis of the liver. What type of coma has the patient developed?
a. Thyrotoxic
*b. Hepatic
c. Hyperglycemic
d. Hypoglycemic
e. Uremic
 
357. Which of the following factors can cause iron deficiency in the human body?
a. Separate feeding
b. Rational nutrition
*c. Unbalanced diet (veganism)
d. Ketogenic diet
e. Raw food diet
 
358. Specify the drug used sublingually during emergency care for a patient with an angina attack, one of the frequent side effects of which is headache.
*a. Nitroglycerin
b. Verapamil
c. Nifedipine
d. Anaprilin
e. Papaverine
 
359. Name the drug that increases blood glucose levels, inhibits protein synthesis, and has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects. It is prescribed for inflammatory diseases, allergic reactions, and for the treatment of coronavirus infection (COVID-19) in adults and adolescents (aged 12 years and over with a body weight of at least 40 kg) who require supplemental oxygen therapy.
*a. Dexamethasone
b. Insulin
c. Ascorbic acid
d. L-thyroxine
e. Nimesulide
 
360. A 49-year-old patient complains of palpitations that suddenly begin and suddenly end, accompanied by dizziness, noise in the head, a feeling of tightness in the chest and occur after emotional or physical overload. Objectively observed: pulse - 150 beats/min, rhythmic, pendulum-like, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. Art. For which pathology are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Sinus arrhythmia
b. Atrial extrasystole
*c. Paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Sinus bradycardia
e. Sinus tachycardia
 
361. The hospital provides life insurance for its employees. Which of the following factors can affect the cost of a voluntary health insurance policy?
a. The insured's lifestyle
b. Financial status of the insured person
*c. Age of the insured person
d. Health status of the insured
e. Profession of the insured
 
362. An employee of a toxic chemicals warehouse was hospitalized. The patient's general condition is serious, there is a sharp narrowing of the pupils, muscle cramps of the whole body, bradycardia, twitching of the tongue and facial muscles, urination disorders. In the blood --- a decrease in cholinesterase activity by 40%. Poisoning with which substance is most likely observed in the patient?
*a. Organophosphorus compounds
b. Organomercury compounds
c. Arsenic-containing compounds
d. Methyl alcohol
e. Carbamates
 
363. In a healthy child of the first year of life, during the examination and assessment of neuropsychiatric development, the following were found: hypertonicity of the limb flexor muscles, fingers clenched into fists, the child reacts to light and loud sounds, fixes his gaze on bright objects, raises his head while lying on his stomach. For what age of the child are the indicated examination results typical?
*a. 1-2 months
b. 6 months
c. 3 months
d. 4-5 months
e. 8 months
 
364. A 57-year-old man complains of a sharp headache accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Objectively observed: blood pressure --- 180/120 mm Hg. Art., consciousness is confused, positive Kernig's and Brudzinski's symptoms on both sides. For which pathology are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Meningococcal meningitis
*b. Subarachnoid hemorrhage
c. Hypertensive crisis
d. Sympatho-adrenal crisis
e. ---
 
365. The head nurse developed the measures that the healthcare facility must implement during the year, indicated the deadlines for implementation and responsible executors. What function of organizational management did she perform?
a. Service lock
b. Organizational analysis
c. Strategic management
*d. Operational planning
e. Functional lock
 
366. A 56-year-old female patient has been diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Specify the drug used in emergency care for an asthma attack.
a. Ambroxol
b. Mukaltin
*c. Salbutamol
d. Nitroglycerin
e. Ceftriaxone
 
367. The fourth stage of the management process structure involves adjusting and coordinating the management process until it is completed. What will happen to the draft management decision under the influence of external factors?
a. Will not change under any circumstances
*b. Subject to change
c. Undergoing additional analysis
d. Regulated by a planned plan
e. Proceeds to the next stage
 
368. A 39-year-old female patient complains of shortness of breath, moderate cough with a small amount of sputum, heaviness in the left half of the chest, an increase in body temperature to 37.7°C. These symptoms appeared and intensified during the week. Objectively observed: BH --- 26/min, the left half of the chest lags behind in the act of breathing, below the angle of the left scapula the voice tremor is sharply weakened, auscultatively in this area breathing is not heard. For which pathology are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Bronchiectasis
*b. Exudative pleurisy
c. Intercostal neuralgia
d. Lung abscess
e. Pneumonia
 
369. A 10-year-old child is diagnosed with a comatose state accompanied by increased muscle tone and tendon reflexes, general tremor, pale skin, cold sweat, and hypotension. Indicate emergency care in this case.
a. Administer 1 ml of prednisolone intramuscularly
b. Inject 20 units of insulin subcutaneously
c. Inject 10 units of insulin subcutaneously
*d. Administer 40 ml of 20% glucose solution intravenously
e. Administer 0.3 ml of 0.1% adrenaline solution subcutaneously
 
370. A patient has developed signs of acute left ventricular heart failure against the background of a hypertensive crisis. What measures should be taken to provide emergency care to the patient at the prehospital stage?
a. Recommend an examination by a family doctor
b. Immediately hospitalize the patient
c. Administer antihypertensive drugs intramuscularly
*d. Place the patient in a sitting position with the lower limbs lowered.
e. Place in horizontal position with lower limbs elevated
 
371. An organized collection of documents and information, a computerized information processing technology is called an information system. What are the main functions of such a system?
a. Information collection, data analysis, data synthesis, information systematization
b. Information search and systematization, data storage and organization
c. Information accumulation, storage, accumulation, search and transmission of data, systematization of information
*d. Information collection, storage, accumulation, data processing, planning and organization of the system
e. Collection and storage of information
 
372. How often should the general condition of the mother be assessed, including blood pressure and pulse rate, in the early second stage of labor?
a. Every 150 minutes
b. Every 30 minutes
*c. Every 15 minutes
d. Every 60 minutes
e. Every 120 min
 
373. A 23-year-old pregnant woman has fever, bitter taste in the mouth, pain in the right hypochondrium, and positive Murphy and Kerr signs. What is the most informative diagnostic method for establishing the diagnosis in this case?
a. Retrograde pancreaticocholangiography
b. Intravenous cholecystography
c. Computed tomography
*d. Ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs
e. Oral cholecystography
 
374. A baby was born at 39 weeks of gestation with a body weight of 3300 g, body length of 50 cm, and Apgar score of 8-9. How long should skin-to-skin contact be performed in the delivery room in this case, provided that the mother and baby are in good condition?
a. 30 min
*b. At least 2 hours
c. During the day
d. 1 hour
e. The first 2-3 days
 
375. A five-year-old boy developed anaphylactic shock after intramuscular injection of an antibiotic. What drug is used to infiltrate the allergen injection site?
a. 0.5% solution of novocaine
b. 0.9% sodium chloride solution
c. 1% diphenhydramine solution
*d. 0.1% adrenaline solution
e. 50% analgin solution
 
376. A 56-year-old man accidentally injured a tumor-like formation located in the right subscapular region. During objective examination, a tumor of soft-elastic consistency, brown in color, up to 2 cm in diameter with a defined zone of hyperemia around it was detected. Specify the main method of verification of malignant neoplasms.
a. Complete blood count
b. Ultrasound
c. MRI
*d. Histological
e. X-ray
 
377. Job descriptions define the organizational and legal status of an employee in a structural unit and provide conditions for his effective work. What is included in job descriptions?
*a. The main tasks of an employee, based on certain skills and powers
b. A list of instructions for each employee to complete tasks
c. Main tasks, responsibilities, functions and qualities of the employee
d. General provisions of the basic principles of the organization's work
e. Rights and obligations of the manager and employee
 
378. Specify the position of the head of a non-state form of ownership, who is responsible for the rational financial and economic activities, use of material, financial and labor resources of a medical and preventive institution.
a. Resident
b. Senior nurse
c. Head of department
*d. Director
e. Head nurse
 
379. A nurse administered furosemide intravenously to a 65-year-old patient with chronic heart failure as prescribed by the doctor. An hour after the injection, he complained of palpitations, heart failure, chest discomfort, shortness of breath, and dizziness. The ECG showed frequent ventricular extrasystoles. What electrolyte disturbance most likely caused these symptoms in the patient?
a. Hypermagnesemia
*b. Hypokalemia
c. Hypernatremia
d. Hypocalcemia
e. Hyperkalemia
 
380. At what age is the first routine vaccination of children against measles, rubella, and mumps carried out according to the Preventive Vaccination Calendar in Ukraine?
a. 3 months
b. 14 years old
c. 2 months
*d. 12 months
e. 3-5 days
 
381. A three-year-old child suffering from acute respiratory viral infections suddenly developed a worsening general condition at night: the child became restless, cried all the time, body temperature was 38°C, breathing was frequent, deep, audible at a distance, and a paroxysmal "barking" cough appeared. What emergency condition did the child develop?
a. Quincke's edema
*b. Stenosing laryngotracheitis
c. Status asthmaticus
d. Bronchial asthma attack
e. Spasmophilia
 
382. What kidney damage is typical for systemic lupus erythematosus?
a. Nephrolithiasis
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Cystitis
d. Amyloidosis
*e. Glomerulonephritis
 
383. A newborn child has blisters with clear contents up to several millimeters in diameter on the skin of the trunk, head, and natural folds. On the second day, the blisters are filled with serous-purulent contents, and there is no itching. For which pathology are these clinical manifestations typical?
*a. Vesiculopustulosis
b. Fridays
c. Diaper rash
d. Chickenpox
e. Pemphigus of the newborn
 
384. A 25-year-old female patient with chronic gastritis complains of discomfort in the epigastric region after eating, bloating, belching, nausea, heartburn, and early feeling of satiety. These complaints are typical of which syndrome?
*a. Gastric dyspepsia
b. Achilles
c. Increased gastric secretion
d. Celiac disease
e. Malabsorption
 
385. A ten-year-old boy has been tentatively diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse. What examination should the child be prepared for in order to obtain the most informative data to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Cycle ergometry
b. Electrocardiography
c. Chest X-rays
d. Phonocardiography
*e. Echocardiography
 
386. What unconditioned reflex is characteristic of a newborn baby and is manifested by opening the mouth when the baby's palm is pressed in the area of the thumb's elevation?
*a. Babkina
b. Kussmaul
c. Moreau
d. Bauer
E. Landau
 
387. A two-month-old child, while walking outside, suddenly developed cyanosis of the face, the skin became covered with sticky sweat, he became bulging, and after a few seconds a loud inhalation ("rooster cry") occurred. Preliminary diagnosis: manifest spasmophilia. What drug is used for pathogenetic treatment of this disease?
a. 40% glucose solution
b. 25% magnesium sulfate solution
*c. 10% calcium gluconate solution
d. 4% sodium bicarbonate solution
e. 5% glucose solution
 
388. A woman at 28 weeks of pregnancy is diagnosed with moderate preeclampsia. Which of the following antihypertensive drugs is used if the woman's diastolic blood pressure is higher than 100-109 mm Hg?
a. Magnesium sulfate
*b. Nifedipine
c. Furosemide
d. Captopril
e. Enalapril
 
389. Indicate the approximate appropriate body weight of a healthy five-year-old child.
a. 15 kg
b. 22 kg
c. 26 kg
*d. 20 kg
e. 24 kg
 
390. The head nurse of a perinatal center analyzes its activities. She found internal shortcomings and advantages, prescribed opportunities and external threats in the center's activities. After analyzing them in pairs, she received a development strategy. What method did she use?
a. PEST analysis
b. ANPO analysis
*c. SWOT analysis
d. PESTEL analysis
e. BSC analysis
 
391. A six-year-old child weighing 20 kg is prescribed paracetamol. Paracetamol syrup for children contains 120 mg of paracetamol in 5 ml. Calculate the single dose of syrup for this child if the doctor prescribed the drug at a dosage of 12 mg/kg of body weight per dose.
a. 2 ml
b. 3 ml
c. 12 ml
d. 5 ml
*e. 10 ml
 
392. A 58-year-old patient complains of decreased physical activity, dry and flaky skin, hair loss, hoarse voice, general weakness and lethargy, drowsiness, weight gain, chills. Objectively observed: puffiness and pastiness of the face, yellowish skin color, tongue enlargement, excessive development of subcutaneous fat, pulse - 56 beats/min, rhythmic, blood pressure - 100/60 mm Hg. Blood hormone levels: T4 and T3 are reduced, TSH is increased. For which thyroid disease are the indicated clinical and laboratory indicators characteristic?
a. Nodular toxic goiter
b. Acute thyroiditis
c. Thyrotoxicosis
d. Chronic thyroiditis
*e. Hypothyroidism
 
393. Which of the following aspects is characteristic of decentralized management in the health sector?
a. All medical institutions are subordinate to the central government
b. Decisions on financing and development of health services are made by the central governing body
c. Decisions regarding the direct activities of medical institutions are made centrally
d. Management is carried out according to a single regulatory framework for all regions
*e. Autonomy of regions in making decisions about financing and developing health services
 
394. What is the name of the national document certifying the right to practice medicine in compliance with special requirements?
a. Law
*b. License
c. Prescription
d. Resolution
e. Orders
 
395. At what level of management are the goals and possible results of a medical organization's activities determined in the future?
a. Tactical
b. Operational
*c. Strategic
d. Functional
e. Technical
 
396. Specify the complications of hyperthermic syndrome that occur mainly in young children.
*a. Febrile seizures
b. Gastric bleeding
c. Anaphylactic shock
d. Paroxysmal cough
e. Pneumonia
 
397. A 52-year-old female patient complains of headache in the occipital region, dizziness, nausea, tinnitus, flashing "flies" before the eyes. Objectively observed: facial skin hyperemia, pulse - 86 beats/min, blood pressure - 190/100 mm Hg. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Atrial fibrillation attack
*b. Hypertensive crisis
c. Angina attack
d. Cerebral circulatory disorders
e. Acute vascular insufficiency
 
398. A 25-year-old woman complains of sharp pain in the lower right abdomen, lasting for an hour, and the appearance of bloody vaginal discharge. From the anamnesis it is known that the last menstruation was 9 weeks ago. The pregnancy test is positive. For which pathological condition is this characteristic?
a. Ovarian apoplexy
b. Acute right-sided adnexitis
c. Rupture of the follicular cyst of the right ovary
d. Acute appendicitis
*e. A ruptured ectopic pregnancy
 
399. A 37-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital in an unconscious state. History: type 1 diabetes mellitus. Low blood glucose levels were detected. Preliminary diagnosis: hypoglycemic coma. What drug is used to provide emergency care to the patient in this case?
a. 0.1% adrenaline solution
b. 0.9% sodium chloride solution
c. 2.5% hydrocortisone solution
*d. 40% glucose solution
e. 5% glucose solution
 
400. Thanks to what quality expertise does a nurse manager have the opportunity to assess the effectiveness of management decisions made and timely adjust them as needed?
a. Inter-sectoral
b. International
c. External
*d. Internal
e. Independent
 
401. A six-year-old child has symptoms of bronchial asthma. What examination is appropriate to perform to assess the presence and severity of airway obstruction in this case?
a. Lung ultrasound
b. Bronchoscopy
c. Radiography of the OGK
*d. Peak flowmetry
e. Bronchography
 
402. Indicate the stage of the thermal chain that prevents heat loss in a newborn baby and promotes colonization of its body by the mother's flora.
a. Staying in an individual delivery room with a comfortable temperature regime
b. Dry the child immediately
c. Providing the child with appropriate (warm) clothing
d. The child's stay in the incubator
*e. Skin-to-skin contact
 
403. An 85-year-old woman suddenly turned pale and lost consciousness. ECG showed third-degree AV block. What are the emergency measures in this case?
*a. Intravenous administration of atropine
b. Intravenous administration of adenosine
c. Weighing samples
d. -
e. Emergency electrocardioversion
 
404. A 48-year-old woman complains of general weakness, shortness of breath, which often occurs at night, palpitations, hemoptysis. In the anamnesis: frequent bacterial tonsillitis. Objectively observed: acrocyanosis, pulse - 102/min, rhythmic, blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg. During auscultation, a diastolic murmur is heard over the apex of the heart. Which of the following research methods is the most informative for clarifying the diagnosis?
a. Radiography of the OGK
b. Electrocardiography
c. Coronary angiography
*d. Echocardioscopy
e. Spirometry
 
405. A woman at 37 weeks of pregnancy was hospitalized to the emergency department of a maternity hospital with complaints of severe headache, "flies flashing before the eyes". Objectively observed: blood pressure --- 160/110 mm Hg. Art., edema of the lower extremities and anterior abdominal wall, proteinuria --- 5 g/l. During the examination, the woman began to have tonic-clonic seizures. For which pathological condition are these clinical manifestations characteristic?
a. Epilepsy
b. Hemorrhagic stroke
c. Hypertensive crisis
*d. Eclampsia
e. Renal colic
 
406. An eight-year-old child has a fever of up to 38.6°C, cramp-like abdominal pain without clear localization, false urges to defecate, frequent loose stools with a significant content of mucus and streaks of blood. For which disease are these clinical manifestations typical?
a. Salmonellosis
b. Botulism
*c. Shigellosis
d. Rotavirus infection
e. Typhoid fever
 
407. In a three-month-old breastfed child, anthropometric studies revealed insufficient weight gain over the past month. During the interview with the child's mother, it turned out that she notices a decrease in the volume of breast milk. What procedure is most appropriate to carry out first of all to determine further tactics in this case?
a. Determination of pulse and its properties
b. Measuring the child's body length
*c. Control weighing of the child
d. Measurement of head and chest circumference
e. Checking the presence and symmetry of tendon reflexes
 
408. What is the name of the program that determines the list and scope of medical services, medicines, and medical devices that the state guarantees to the population and pays for from the State Budget at the same rates for all institutions?
a. Health System Development Program
*b. Medical Guarantee Program
c. Supplementary Health Insurance Program
d. Medical subvention
e. Strategic hospital development plan
 
409. A 25-year-old female patient, who had acute tonsillitis 2 weeks ago, complains of dull pain in the lumbar region, weakness, decreased appetite, headache, and urine of the color of "meat slops". Objectively observed: pallor of the skin, swelling on the face, weakly positive Pasternatsky's symptom on both sides. The result of a general urine analysis: specific gravity - 1018, alkaline reaction, protein - 0.99 g/l, erythrocytes 60-80 in the field of view of the microscope. For which disease are the indicated clinical and laboratory indicators characteristic?
*a. Acute glomerulonephritis
b. Acute cystitis
c. Acute pyelonephritis
d. Chronic pyelonephritis
e. Urolithiasis
 
410. A 42-year-old patient developed symptoms of pneumonia 52 hours after appendectomy: general weakness, fever, cough, and chest pain. Classify the type of pneumonia.
a. Aspiration
b. Atypical
c. Bronchopneumonia
*d. Nosocomial
e. Pneumonia in immunocompromised individuals
 
411. What is the name of a person who seeks medical care or has used it, regardless of their condition (sick, healthy, or if they have agreed to medical and biological research)?
*a. Patient
b. Consumer
c. Recipient
d. Subject
e. Object
 
412. A 25-year-old woman received a burn of her left hand with boiling water an hour ago. Objectively observed: the skin at the burn site is hyperemic, swollen, and there are blisters filled with clear fluid. Which of the following should be performed first at the prehospital stage when providing emergency care to the patient?
a. Apply a bandage with antiseptic to the affected area
b. Apply an ointment bandage to the affected area
c. Puncture the blisters and apply a bandage
*d. Cool the burn area with cool running water
e. Treat the burn area with alcohol
 
413. Which of the following drugs is used for basic pharmacotherapy of rheumatoid arthritis?
a. Diclofenac
b. Ciprofloxacin
c. Colchicine
*d. Methotrexate
e. Prednisolone
 
414. On the 3rd day of life, a newborn baby developed small, dense, whitish papules surrounded by a pink border on the skin of the buttocks, chest, and around the joints. What transitional state of the neonatal period are these symptoms typical of?
a. Sexual crisis
b. Transient erythema
c. Physiological jaundice
*d. Erythema toxicum
e. Uric acid infarction
 
415. What form of primary accounting documentation should be filled out by the nurse of the maternity ward's medical registry in the event of hospitalization of a pregnant woman for a planned cesarean section?
a. 003-1/o
*b. 096/o
p. 111/o
d. 113/o
e. 025/o
 
416. Which of the following drugs is used for conservative treatment of diffuse toxic goiter?
a. Allopurinol
b. L-thyroxine
*c. Mercazolil
d. Metformin
e. Methotrexate
 
417. A 40-year-old man has symptoms of arsenic poisoning. Choose a complex of antidote therapy for this intoxication.
a. Noradrenaline, mezaton (phenylephrine)
*b. Unithiol preparations, calcium tetacin
c. Sodium nitrite, sodium thiosulfate
d. Acetylcysteine, methionine
e. Atropine sulfate, dipyroxime
 
418. A 63-year-old patient with hypertension for over 15 years developed symptoms of chronic heart failure stage IIA (diastolic variant according to echocardiography). What echocardiogram parameter was used to diagnose this variant of heart failure?
a. Left ventricular stroke volume
b. Left ventricular end-diastolic volume
*c. Left ventricular ejection fraction
d. Left ventricular end-systolic volume
e. Right ventricular ejection fraction
 
419. After working with an insecticide solution without personal protective equipment, a man developed shortness of breath, increased salivation, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. What functional antagonist should be used to provide emergency care to the patient?
a. 5% pentamine solution
b. 0.2% aceclidine solution
c. 1% solution of pilocarpine hydrochloride
*d. 0.1% atropine sulfate solution
e. 0.05% solution of proserin
 
420. Under which of the following conditions can a group of people be considered an organization?
a. The presence of controlled and supervised systems
b. The presence of at least one person who has a specific goal and the resources to achieve it
*c. The presence of at least two people and at least one common goal that all group members strive to achieve
d. The presence of people with common goals and resources
e. The presence of responsibility and some level of autonomy
 
421. At what stage is the upper airway patency assessment performed according to the MARCH protocol?
a. H
b. C
c. R
d. M
*e. A
 
422. What factor can cause uneven distribution of workload between performers?
a. Insufficient financial motivation of employees
b. Manager's bias
c. Inequality of tasks
*d. Lack of reasonable standards
e. Sympathy for individual employees
 
423. A child has developed angioedema due to aerosolized exposure to an allergen. What antihistamine is used in emergency care in this case?
a. 2% papaverine solution
b. 40% glucose solution
c. 1% mezaton solution
*d. 2% suprastin solution
e. 50% analgin solution
 
424. Which healthcare institution, within the framework of its activities, ensures the implementation of a set of preventive measures to prevent and reduce morbidity, disability and mortality, early detection of diseases, provides the population with qualified primary medical and preventive care, conducts medical examinations and health monitoring?
a. District hospital
*b. General practice family medicine clinic
c. Hospice
d. Dispensary
e. Consultative polyclinic of the city hospital
 
425. What characteristic of a production and economic organization determines the actions of its members and forms the basis for the development of strategic plans, cohesion, and unification?
a. Organizational culture
*b. Purposefulness
c. Carrying out certain activities
d. Presence of structure
e. The presence of a certain number of participants
 
426. A 52-year-old patient, after walking quickly or climbing stairs, experiences a squeezing pain behind the sternum, lasting 5 minutes, radiating to the left shoulder and left arm, and is relieved by rest. What examination will determine the patient's individual tolerance to physical exertion?
*a. Cycle ergometry
b. Spirometry
c. Echocardiography
d. Pulse oximetry
e. Electrocardiography
 
427. In a 35-year-old patient in the intensive care unit, objectively observed: the general condition is extremely serious, consciousness is absent, the pulse is frequent, tense, blood pressure --- 160/110 mm Hg. Art. Auscultatively, a pericardial friction rub is heard in the heart. Muscle tone is increased, hyperreflexia. The smell of ammonia is felt in the exhaled air. Creatinine level in the blood --- 1060 μmol/l. For which pathological condition is this characteristic?
a. Alcoholic coma
b. Hypoglycemic coma
c. Hyperglycemic coma
d. Addisonian crisis
*e. Uremic coma
 
428. What unconditioned reflex, characteristic of a newborn child, is manifested by spreading the shoulders and embracing movements of the upper limbs when the buttocks or the surface on which the child lies is patted?
a. Galanta
b. Perez
*c. Moreau
d. Babkina
e. Kernig
 
429. A 30-year-old patient has been diagnosed with diphtheria. What is the main preventive measure to prevent the occurrence of this disease?
a. Contact tracing for 10 days
*b. Administration of DTP vaccines and toxoids
c. Isolation of sick patients, hospitalization and treatment
d. Current and final disinfection in the infection center
e. Administration of antitoxic serum and antibiotics
 
430. What does organization mean as a management function?
a. Development of a strategic plan
b. Making plans for the organization as an entity
c. Development of management decisions to achieve the goal of the organization as an entity
d. Organization is not a management function
*e. The process of creating a structure and allocating resources within an organization to achieve set goals
 
431. Specify the typical clinical manifestations of deforming osteoarthritis.
a. Intermittent lameness
b. Symmetrical pain and swelling of small joints
c. Sudden intense attack of pain in the first toe
d. Migratory joint pain
*e. "Starting pain", "blockage" of the affected joint
 
432. At what stage of pregnancy are all pregnant women screened for gestational diabetes by performing a two-hour oral glucose tolerance test?
a. 3-5 weeks
b. 11-13 weeks
c. 18-22 weeks
d. 28-32 weeks
*e. 24-28 weeks
 
433. After an injection of a drug from the group of ganglioblockers, a patient suddenly developed dizziness, a feeling of general weakness, chills, and chills. Objectively observed: consciousness is clouded, skin and mucous membranes are pale, forehead and temples are covered with cold sweat, blood pressure --- 75/40 mm Hg., pulse --- 120 beats/min, thready. What pathological condition has developed in the patient?
a. Asthmatic status
b. Cardiogenic shock
c. Myocardial infarction
d. Fainting
*e. Collapse
 
434. Specify a special type of medical institution whose functions include providing medical care to incurable patients, which operates at the expense of the local budget, additional funding from enterprises, sponsors, individuals and legal entities.
a. Dispensary
b. Perinatal center
c. Polyclinic
d. Clinic
*e. Hospice
 
435. Indicate the localization of pain during the typical course of appendicitis.
a. -
*b. Right iliac region
c. Left hypochondrium
d. Right hypochondrium
e. Left iliac region
 
436. A 28-year-old woman complains of the absence of menstruation. From the anamnesis it is known that she gave birth 5 months ago and the woman is exclusively breastfeeding. During the gynecological examination, no pathology and pregnancy were detected. What is the name of the woman's condition?
a. Opsomenorrhea
*b. Lactational amenorrhea
c. Oligomenorrhea
d. Primary amenorrhea
e. Menometrorrhagia
 
437. A patient is diagnosed with acute iridocyclitis. Which of the following drugs is used to treat the patient in this case?
*a. 1% atropine sulfate solution in the form of eye drops
b. Furacilin solution (eye wash)
c. Alcohol solution of calendula (lubrication of the eyelid skin)
d. 1% pilocarpine solution in the form of eye drops
e. Tetracycline ointment (applied behind the eyelid)
 
438. A woman's first pregnancy and timely delivery gave birth to a baby weighing 3300 g and measuring 51 cm. When should the first weighing of a newborn baby be performed?
a. Immediately after the umbilical cord is clamped
b. After ophthalmia prophylaxis
c. During the second day after birth
*d. After completing skin-to-skin contact in the delivery room
e. 5 minutes after birth
 
439. What is the basis for dividing the development of management theory into stages?
a. Certain historical periods
b. The stages are artificially distinguished without any basis
c. Equal time intervals
*d. The period of the creation of certain scientific schools of management
e. Dates of life of the authors of these theories
 
440. A woman in labor suffers from severe diabetes. After a cesarean section, she fainted. Objectively observed: Kussmaul breathing, pale skin, hypothermia, hypotension, acetone breath odor, anuria, blood glucose --- 19 mmol/l, plasma osmolarity --- 320 mosmol/l. What is the reason for the deterioration of the patient's condition?
a. Air embolism
*b. Ketoacidotic coma
c. Amniotic fluid embolism
d. Acute cerebrovascular accident
e. Eclampsia attack
 
441. A 55-year-old patient complains of a burning pain behind the sternum, a feeling of shortness of breath and fear. ECG monitoring results: ST segment elevation, T wave inversion in leads III and aVF. Which of the following drugs is used during emergency care for the patient in this case?
a. Nitroglycerin
*b. Morphine
c. Sidnopharm
d. Nifedipine
e. Verapamil
 
442. The patient independently chose an insurance company for medical insurance and concluded an agreement with it. What role does the insurance company play in the compulsory medical insurance system in this case?
a. Beneficiary
b. The insured person
c. The insured
d. -
*e. Insurer
 
443. A patient with rheumatic fever is being treated in the rheumatology department. During the examination, the following were found: tachycardia, attacks of inspiratory dyspnea at night, cyanotic blush on the cheeks. Which examination is the most informative for diagnosing acquired heart disease?
a. Electrocardiography
*b. Echocardiography
c. Chest X-ray
d. Cycle ergometry
e. Phonocardiography
 
444. A 29-year-old woman at 32 weeks of pregnancy complains of insufficient sensation of fetal movements. Cardiotocography is prescribed to study the fetal cardiac activity and record its heart rate (HR). Specify the normal limits of the fetal heart rate.
a. 150-200 beats/min
b. -
c. 120-190 beats/min
*d. 110-170 beats/min
e. 60-80 beats/min
 
445. A 37-year-old woman, after excessive coffee consumption, suddenly developed an attack of rapid heartbeat, accompanied by excitement, sweating, a feeling of fear and trembling in the heart area. Objectively observed: pale skin, rapid breathing, swelling of the neck veins and their pulsation synchronously with the pulse, rhythmic pulse, weak filling, significantly accelerated, heart rate - 170/min, blood pressure - 110/70 mm Hg. Specify the emergency measures that should be carried out first.
a. Nitroglycerin sublingually
b. Intravenous administration of atropine
c. Intravenous administration of adrenaline
*d. Weighing tests
e. Load tests
 
446. A 44-year-old man who was injured in a traffic accident underwent urgent surgery for hemoperitoneum. In case of damage to which internal organ can the patient's blood from the abdominal cavity be used for reinfusion, provided that the necessary sterility conditions are ensured?
a. Small intestine
b. Pancreas
*c. Spleen
d. Liver
e. Stomach
 
447. How is the quality of medical care assessed?
a. Chemical method
*b. Through analysis and comparison
c. Balance sheet method
d. Through observation and experimentation
e. Expense method
 
448. A 60-year-old man suddenly felt general weakness and fainted. From the anamnesis it is known: a heart transplant was performed a month ago. At the time of examination it was found: consciousness was preserved, BH --- 2 in 10 sec, weak peripheral pulse --- 8 in 10 sec. According to the results of cardiac monitoring, AV-blockade of the 2nd degree according to the Mobitz 2 type was detected. What measures should be taken to start providing emergency care to the patient?
a. Amiodarone administration
b. Synchronized cardioversion
c. Vagus tests
*d. Transcutaneous electrical cardioversion
e. Administration of atropine
 