1. Surfactant synthesis is impaired in premature newborns. What is its function in the lungs?
*a. Reduces the surface tension of the alveolar walls
b. Increases the airway resistance
c. Impairs the О_2 diffusion through the aerogematic barrier
d. Increases the surface tension of the alveolar walls
e. Facilitates diaphragmatic excursion

2. A patient developed hyperchromic megaloblastic anemia after gastric resection. What drug must be prescribed in this case?
a. Magnesium sulfate
b. Iron(II) sulfate
c. Ascorbic acid
d. Tranexamic acid
*e. Cyanocobalamin

3. After eating, a 67-year-old woman with long history of cholecystitis suddenly developed sharp pain in her upper abdomen, nausea, and vomiting. She has been diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. What is the main link in the pathogenesis of this disease?
a. Decreased enzyme levels in pancreatic juice
*b. Premature activation of pancreatic enzymes
c. Decreased secretion of pancreatic polypeptide
d. Increased enzyme activation in the duodenum
e. Increased cholecystokinin levels

4. A patient has attacks of bronchial asthma that usually occur at night and are accompanied by bradycardia, spastic intestinal pain, and diarrhea. What group of drugs can eliminate these symptoms?
a. %alpha-blockers
b. %beta-blockers
c. Nicotinic antagonists, histamine H_2 blockers
*d. Muscarinic antagonists
e. Sympatholytics

5. A patient with chronic renal failure presents with the inulin clearance decreased to 60 mL/min. What kidney function is impaired in this case, causing this phenomenon?
a. Reabsorption in the distal part of the nephron
b. Reabsorption in the proximal part of the nephron
*c. Glomerular filtration
d. Reabsorption in the collecting tubules of the kidney
e. Tubular secretion

6. Unlike nerve cells that usually do not reproduce, stem cells can renew themselves multiple times. What is this repeated cell renewal called?
a. Apoptosis
b. Atrophy
c. Differentiation
d. Hypertrophy
*e. Proliferation

7. A woman has been diagnosed with bone marrow syndrome of acute radiation sickness. What hematological symptoms will be observed during the height of the disease?
a. Erythrocytosis
*b. Pancytopenia
c. Left-shift of the leukocyte formula
d. Relative lymphocytosis
e. Relative lymphopenia

8. The biopsy material obtained from the enlarged lymph node of a patient with a subfebrile temperature contains numerous granulomas with caseous necrosis in their center. The areas of necrosis are surrounded by epithelioid cells, Langhans giant multinucleated cells, and lymphocytes. What disease can be characterized by these pathohistological changes?
a. Lymphocytic leukemia
b. Lymphosarcoma
c. Lymphadenitis
*d. Tuberculosis
e. Lymphogranulomatosis

9. During the autopsy of the body of a 34-year-old man, who died of chronic kidney disease due to renal amyloidosis, the pathologist reveals multiple diffuse dilatations of the bronchi with purulent content in their lumina, observed mainly in the lower lobes. The surface of the lung section has small hollow cells and resembles a honeycomb. Histologically, there is chronic inflammation in the bronchial wall, muscle fibers are replaced by connective tissue. What changes have been detected in the lungs by the pathologist?
a. Chronic bronchitis
b. Lung abscesses
c. Chronic pneumonia
d. Bronchopneumonia
*e. Bronchiectasis

10. The patient's karyotype has 47 chromosomes and a Barr body has been detected in the nucleus of a somatic cell. Additional testing reveals endocrine insufficiency: testicular hypoplasia and absence of spermatogenesis. What syndrome is indicated by this phenotype?
a. Edwards syndrome
b. Turner syndrome
c. Down syndrome
d. Patau syndrome
*e. Klinefelter syndrome

11. When performing endoscopy, the doctor detected impaired integrity of the patient's gastric wall within the mucosa. What type of epithelium normally makes up the innermost lining of the gastric wall?
a. Non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
b. Pseudostratified epithelium
c. Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
d. Transitional epithelium
*e. Simple prismatic (columnar) glandular epithelium

12. A boy in his second year of life frequently develops respiratory diseases, stomatitis, and pustular skin lesions. Even minor injuries to his gums and mucosa become complicated by prolonged inflammation. It has been established that the child's blood contains virtually no immunoglobulins of all classes. The described syndrome is underlied by a decrease in the functional activity of a certain cell population. Name this cell population.
a. NK-lymphocytes
b. Neutrophils
*c. B-lymphocytes
d. Macrophages
e. T-lymphocytes

13. Microscopy of the lungs of a 52-year-old patient detects foci of necrosis, surrounded by a border consisting of epithelioid cells and lymphocytes. Among the lymphocytes and epithelioid cells, there are large round cells with numerous nuclei located on their periphery. What is the name of the detected formation?
a. Cancer pearl
b. Leprous granuloma
*c. Tuberculous granuloma
d. Syphilitic granuloma
e. Sarcoid granuloma

14. Examination of a patient at the neurology unit of a hospital detects smoothed-out forehead wrinkles, inability to squint, lowered corner of the mouth, and the "sail" sign (the cheek passively puffs during breathing). What nerve is damaged in this case?
a. Vagus
b. Accessory
c. Oculomotor
*d. Facial
e. Trigeminal

15. The pregnant woman's condition has been complicated by gestosis. Laboratory testing detects ketonuria. What substance has appeared in the patient's urine?
a. Creatinine
b. Lactate
c. Pyruvate
d. Urates
*e. Acetoacetate

16. A man presents with acne and inflammatory changes in the skin of his face. Microscopy of the material obtained from the lesion foci reveals live elongated arthropods with 4 pairs of reduced limbs. Make the provisional diagnosis.
a. Pediculosis
*b. Demodicosis
c. Allergy
d. Sarcoptes scabiei infestation on the skin
e. Flea infestation on the skin

17. A man came to a doctor with complaints of nausea, vomiting, and pain in his upper abdomen that occurs more often at night or on an empty stomach. After objective examination, he was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease of the stomach and prescribed complex therapy. The therapy includes a drug with the mechanism of action that blocks H^+/K^+-ATPase enzyme in parietal cells. Select this drug from the list.
a. Metronidazole
b. Bismuth subcitrate
c. Famotidine
d. Amoxicillin
*e. Omeprazole

18. A patient with acute rheumatic fever has been prescribed diclofenac sodium, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. What disease is a contraindication for prescribing diclofenac sodium?
*a. Peptic ulcer disease of the stomach
b. Diabetes mellitus
c. Bronchitis
d. Angina pectoris
e. Essential hypertension

19. A 28-year-old woman has been hospitalized to the gynecological unit of a hospital with complaints of abdominal pain. She has been been diagnosed with an ovarian tumor. When performing the surgery to remove the ovary, it is necessary to severe the ligament that connects the ovary to the uterus. What ligament should the surgeon cut in this case?
*a. Lig. ovarii proprium
b. Lig. teres uteri
c. Lig. cardinale
d. Lig. suspensorium ovarii
e. Lig. latum uteri

20. In molecular biology, a method is used that allows determining the sequence of nucleotides in a DNA molecule based on the amino acid composition of the polypeptide. This method uses the following property of the genetic code:
a. Specificity
b. Degeneracy
*c. Collinearity
d. Universality
e. Non-overlapping

21. A 42-year-old patient complains of epigastric pain, vomiting, "coffee grounds" vomitus, and melena. The patient has history of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. Blood test results: erythrocytes - 2.8·10^12/L, leukocytes - 8·10^9/L, hemoglobin - 90 g/L. What complication has most likely developed in the patient?
*a. Bleeding
b. Penetration
c. Pyloric stenosis
d. Malignization
e. Perforation

22. A 49-year-old patient complains of the blood pressure that is persistently elevated to 155/120 mm Hg. The recommended hypotensive therapy, lasting for a month, was ineffective. Additional examination detected hypernatremia, hypochloremia, and adrenal hyperplasia. The diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism was made. Because surgical treatment was impossible in this case, the patient was recommended pharmacotherapy with a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. What drug was recommended for the patient?
a. Amlodipine besylate
b. Losartan
c. Metoprolol tartrate
*d. Spironolactone
e. Captopril

23. A patient with heart failure developed arrhythmia, where ECG shows the atrial rate of 70/min and the ventricular rate of 35/min. What cardiac function is impaired in the patient?
a. Excitability
*b. Conductivity
c. Contractility
d. Automatism
e. Excitability and conductivity

24. The Widal test is used in serological diagnostics of typhoid fever. What mechanism of antigen-antibody interaction is it based on?
a. Hemolysis
*b. Agglutination
c. Bacterial immobilization
d. Precipitation
e. Bacteriolysis

25. A man presents with decreased blood pH and bicarbonate ion levels (a decreased alkaline reserve in the blood) and increased levels of lactic and pyruvic acids in his blood and urine. What type of acid-base imbalance can be observed in this patient?
a. Respiratory acidosis
b. Mixed alkalosis
c. Metabolic alkalosis
*d. Metabolic acidosis
e. Respiratory alkalosis

26. A bacteriological laboratory received the test material (gastric lavage fluid, homemade dried fish) obtained from a patient with suspected botulism. What should be used as the initial culture medium for the inoculation of this material?
a. Serum agar
b. Blood-sugar agar
c. Sugar-meat-peptone agar
*d. Kitt-Tarozzi medium
e. Sugar-meat-peptone broth

27. A histological specimen of the ovary shows a spherical structure that consists of large glandular cells, containing the pigment lutein. What hormone is produced by the cells of this structure?
*a. Progesterone
b. Testosterone
c. Corticosterone
d. Estrogen
e. Aldosterone

28. As a result of a head injury, a localized hematoma formed in the area of the middle cranial fossa on the left, causing pupil dilation on the affected side. What nerve is affected in this case?
a. N. trochlearis
*b. N. oculomotorius
c. N. abduceus
d. N. opticus
e. N. trigeminus

29. An HIV-infected patient presents with suppressed immune system activity. In this case, damage to certain cells contributes the most to causing the patient's immunodeficiency. Name these cells.
a. B-lymphocytes
b. Macrophages
c. Suppressor T cells
*d. Helper T cells
e. Killer T cells

30. A patient developed hemolytic jaundice as a result of transfusion of Rh-incompatible blood. What blood test value can confirm this type of jaundice?
*a. Accumulation of unconjugated bilirubin
b. Decreased levels of conjugated bilirubin
c. Decreased levels of unconjugated bilirubin
d. Decreased stercobilin levels
e. Accumulation of urobilinogen

31. A 47-year-old woman presents with the interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints that can be easily dislocated or subluxated, with typical "walrus flipper" deviation of her fingers. Microscopy detects proliferation of the synovial villi, destruction of the cartilage, and formation of pannus. What disease causes such pathological changes?
*a. Rheumatoid arthritis
b. Rheumatic arthritis
c. Bechterew's disease (ankylosing spondylitis)
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus
e. Osteoarthrosis

32. An endocrine gland has been presented for the morphological study. The parenchyma of the gland consists of epithelial and nervous tissues. The epithelial trabeculae have 2 types of cells: chromophilic and chromophobic. What organ is it?
a. Adrenal gland
b. Hypothalamus
*c. Pituitary gland
d. Thyroid gland
e. Parathyroid gland

33. A study of residual nitrogen shows that urea nitrogen is significantly reduced. What organ is affected in this case, as indicated by this characteristic?
a. Brain
*b. Liver
c. Heart
d. Intestine
e. Stomach

34. Against the background of ionizing radiation exposure, a decrease in the granulocyte count was detected in the patient's blood. What causes agranulocytosis in this case?
a. Increased migration of granulocytes into tissues
b. Increased leukocyte destruction
c. Autoimmune process development
d. Impaired release of mature leukocytes from the bone marrow
*e. Leukopoiesis inhibition

35. Mucopolysaccharidosis is an accumulation disorder, where the lack of enzymes impairs the breakdown of polysaccharides, causing their accumulation and increased excretion in urine. What organelles accumulate mucopolysaccharides in this disorder?
a. Centrosome
*b. Lysosomes
c. Endoplasmic reticulum
d. Mitochondria
e. Golgi complex

36. A patient has been diagnosed with a brain tumor located in the calcarine sulcus. What function will become impaired if the tumor actively grows?
a. Tactile sensitivity
b. Hearing
*c. Vision
d. Taste
e. Smell

37. Stratified squamous epithelium regenerated two weeks after the patient had her tooth extracted. What organelles took part in the restoration of the mucosa?
a. Postlysosomes
b. Centrosomes
c. -
*d. Ribosomes
e. Mitochondria

38. The disease symptoms have started abating in a 34-year-old patient recovering from a case of an intestinal infection caused by Salmonella. What class of immunoglobulins will be detected in the patient's blood during the convalescence period?
a. IgA
b. IgM
c. IgE
*d. IgG
e. IgD

39. A 49-year-old patient presents with increased levels of uric acid in the blood. The doctor prescribed the patient allopurinol to reduce the levels of uric acid. Allopurinol is a competitive inhibitor of a certain enzyme. Name this enzyme.
a. Adenosine deaminase
b. Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase
c. Guanine deaminase
*d. Xanthine oxidase
e. Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase

40. A patient presents with tachycardia, increased basal metabolic rate and body temperature, weight loss, and increased exitability. These disorders are caused by the increased secretion of hormones in the:
a. Neurohypophysis
b. Gonads
*c. Thyroid gland
d. Adrenal glands
e. Parathyroid glands

41. In humans, lack of vitamin A causes impaired twilight vision. What photoreceptor cells of the retina are responsible for twilight vision?
a. Ganglion neurons
*b. Neurosensory rod cells
c. Bipolar neurons
d. Horizontal neurons
e. Neurosensory cone cells

42. The formation of free ammonia in the cells of the renal tubules is mainly associated with the conversion of a nonessential amino acid under the effect of a certain hydrolase enzyme. Name this enzyme.
a. Asparaginase
*b. Glutaminase
c. Glutamate decarboxylase
d. Glutamine synthetase
e. Glutamate dehydrogenase

43. A man developed signs of parkinsonism after a long course of treatment for schizophrenia. What drug could have caused this complication?
*a. Chlorpromazine hydrochloride
b. Fluoxetine hydrochloride
c. Carbamazepine
d. Sodium valproate
e. Diazepam

44. A patient has been administered a solution of morphine hydrochloride subcutaneously for pain relief. What is the mechanism of the analgesic action of this drug?
a. Impaired impulse conduction along the afferent nerves
b. Blockade of peripheral sensory receptors
c. Changing the emotional perception of pain
d. Inhibited formation of pain mediators in the peripheral tissues
*e. Interaction with opioid receptors

45. A patient has sensory aphasia and does not understand speech when spoken to. Where in the nervous system is the damage localized in this case?
a. Superior frontal gyrus
b. Middle temporal gyrus
*c. Superior temporal gyrus
d. Middle frontal gyrus
e. Inferior frontal gyrus

46. In a cell undergoing mitotic division, the daughter chromatids are moving towards the poles of the cell. What stage of mitosis is it?
a. Telophase
b. Metaphase
*c. Anaphase
d. Prophase
e. Interphase

47. A 37-year-old man, a smoker over the last 19 years, complains of constant cough. Bronchial biopsy reveals signs of chronic inflammation, thickening of the mucosa, and transformation of unstratified ciliated epithelium into stratified squamous epithelium. What pathological process is observed in the patient?
*a. Metaplasia
b. Dysplasia
c. Leukoplakia
d. Epithelial hypertrophy
e. Epithelial hyperplasia

48. An animal sensitized with tuberculin received tuberculin intraperitoneally. Twenty-four hours later, laparotomy detected venous hyperemia and edema of the peritoneum. Peritoneal swabs contained numerous lymphocytes and monocytes. What kind of inflammation is occurring in the animal?
a. Purulent
b. Aseptic
c. Fibrinous
d. Serous
*e. Allergic

49. A man provisionally diagnosed with typhoid fever has been hospitalized. He has been ill for three days already. His body temperature is 39^оС. What method of laboratory diagnostics must be used in this case to confirm the diagnosis?
a. Coproculture
b. Urine culture
c. Serology
*d. Blood culture
e. Biliculture

50. A woman with Rh-negative blood of the II group gave birth to a baby with Rh-positive blood of the IV group. The baby has been diagnosed with hemolytic disease caused by the Rh incompatibility. What blood group is possible in the baby's father?
*a. III (B), Rh-positive
b. III (B), Rh-negative
c. II (A), Rh-positive
d. I (O), Rh-positive
e. IV (AB), Rh-negative

51. Examination of a patient detects skin calcification, Raynaud syndrome, an esophageal motility disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia. These changes are called CREST syndrome. What disease can be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Gouty arthritis
*b. Systemic scleroderma
c. Systemic lupus erythematosus
d. Dermatomyositis
e. Rheumatoid arthritis

52. Microscopy of the serous discharge from the patient's urethra revealed pear-shaped cells with flagella, an undulating membrane, and an axostyle. What pathogen is it?
a. Trichomonas hominis
*b. Trichomonas vaginalis
c. Trichomonas tenax
d. -
e. Lamblia intestinalis

53. A patient has been hospitalized with complaints of periodic attacks of palpitations that start spontaneously and pass on their own. ECG detected an episode of contractions at the rate of 200/min with the following characteristics: regular rhythm, no P wave, unchanged QRS complex, deformed T wave. What type of arrhythmia is it?
a. Atrial extrasystole
b. Ventricular extrasystole
*c. Paroxysmal tachycardia
d. Complete AV block
e. First-degree AV block

54. A patient has been diagnosed with a humeral shaft fracture. She cannot extend her arm at the elbow. What nerve has been damaged in this case?
a. N. axillaris
b. N. ulnaris
*c. N. radialis
d. N. medianus
e. N. musculocutaneus

55. A 32-year-old woman came to a gynecologist with complaints of irregular menstruation, decreased libido, vaginal dryness, and fatigue. She has history of one normal delivery 5 years ago, without hormone therapy. Laboratory testing reveals decreased estradiol levels, while her levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) remain normal. What is the main function of estradiol under physiological conditions?
*a. Follicle growth stimulation
b. Progesterone support
c. Gonadotropin inhibition
d. Testosterone stimulation
e. Increasing prolactin levels

56. A man had been working in an African country for 3 years. After moving to Ukraine, he consulted an ophthalmologist with complaints of eye pain, eyelid edema, lacrimation, and temporary vision impairment. Helminths 30-50 mm in size with an elongated filamentous body were detected under the conjunctiva of his eye. What diagnosis can the doctor make in this case?
*a. Filariasis
b. Diphyllobothriasis
c. Trichuriasis
d. Enterobiasis
e. Ascariasis

57. A number of blood cells and connective tissue cells participate in the synthesis and release of inflammatory mediators. What cells synthesize interleukin-1?
a. Platelets
b. Lymphocytes
c. Eosinophilic granulocytes
d. Tissue basophils
*e. Macrophages

58. Total hyperacidity was detected during pH-metry of gastric juice in a 56-year-old woman. What cells of gastric glands are dysfunctional in this case, causing this condition?
a. Mucous neck cells
b. Surface mucous cells
c. Gastric chief exocrine cells
d. Endocrine cells
*e. Parietal exocrine cells

59. Autopsy of the body of a 55-year-old man, who had history of a chronic form of tropical malaria for the past eight years, reveals that the spleen and the gray matter of the brain are slate-gray. What pigment has caused this coloring?
a. Melanin
b. Lipofuscin
c. Hematoporphyrin
d. Hemosiderin
*e. Hemomelanin

60. After a maxillofacial injury, a 40-year-old man developed a disfunction of the sublingual and submandibular salivary glands on the left. Hyposalivation is observed in the affected glands. What pair of nerves does not function properly in this case?
a. XIІ
b. VI
*c. VII
d. Х
e. XI

61. Histology of the biopsy material obtained from the cervical lymph node of a 20-year-old woman reveals nodules, consisting of borders formed from epithelioid and lymphoid cells, with Langhans multinucleated giant cells located among them. Caseous necrosis can be detected in the center of the nodules. What pathogen is the most likely cause of such changes in the lymph node?
a. Rickettsia
b. Mycobacterium leprae
*c. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Koch's bacillus)
d. Fungi
e. Treponema pallidum

62. Clinical examination of a 10-year-old girl detects signs of early puberty in her. What endocrine gland is likely to exhibit decreased function in this case, causing this phenomenon?
a. Adrenal medulla
b. Thymus
c. Parathyroid gland
d. Thyroid gland
*e. Pineal gland

63. Bone tissue contains large cells that have a ruffled border and contain numerous lysosomes and many nuclei. What are these cells called?
a. Mesenchymal cells
b. Osteocytes
*c. Osteoclasts
d. Osteoblasts
e. Semi-stem osteogenic cells

64. During auscultation of the heart sounds, the doctor detected a dysfunction of the patient's mitral valve. Where were the heart sounds auscultated by the doctor?
*a. At the apex of the heart
b. In the second intercostal space on the left near the sternum
c. Near the xiphoid process
d. In the second intercostal space on the right near the sternum
e. Near the second sternocostal joint on the right

65. When analyzing a blood smear prepared from the blood of a patient diagnosed with acute peritonitis, the medical laboratory scientist observes numerous leukocytes 10-12 mcm in size in the field of view of the microscope. Their nuclei consist of several segments. Their cytoplasm contains small granules that color pink-violet, when stained using the Romanowski–Giemza technique. What cells are predominant in the smear?
a. Eosinophils
b. Lymphocytes
c. Basophils
d. Monocytes
*e. Neutrophils

66. A person's heart rate is constantly maintained at 40/min. What is the heart's pacemaker in this case?
a. Sinoatrial node
b. Branches of bundle of His
c. Purkinje fibers
d. Bundle of His
*e. Atrioventricular node

67. Gram-negative rod-shaped microorganisms that form a capsule on a nutrient medium have been isolated from the nasopharynx of a patient with suspected ozaena. What microorganisms have caused the disease?
a. Chlamydia
b. Mycoplasma
c. Shigella
d. Salmonella
*e. Klebsiella

68. A patient diagnosed with essential hypertension takes lisinopril. What is the mechanism of action of this antihypertensive drug?
*a. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition
b. Cyclooxygenase inhibition
c. Blockade of Ca^2+ channels
d. Angiotensin receptor blockade
e. Phosphodiesterase inhibition

69. A patient diagnosed with an acute myocardial infarction has been prescribed an anticoagulant therapy. What value of the blood coagulation system must be measured, when taking heparin, in order to prevent possible complications that can be caused by its overdose?
a. Fibrinogen concentration
b. Prothrombin time
c. International normalized ratio
d. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
*e. Activated partial thromboplastin time

70. As a result of the past case of encephalitis, a man developed paralysis of the eyeball muscles. His doctor established that the nucleus of the oculomotor nerve had been damaged in this patient. Where in the brain does the pathological process take place in this case?
a. Diencephalon
*b. Mesencephalon
c. Medulla oblongata
d. Cerebellum
e. Pons

71. A patient with acute myocarditis has developed clinical signs of cardiogenic shock. What pathogenetic mechanism is the leading one in the development of shock in the patient?
a. Blood deposition in organs
*b. Impaired pumping function of the heart
c. Decreased diastolic influx to the heart
d. Increased peripheral vascular resistance
e. Decreased vascular tone

72. A microbial culture, grown from a pus sample obtained from a furuncle, contains spherical microbes, clustered together like a bunch of grapes. What microbes have been detected in the culture?
a. Micrococci
b. Diplococci
*c. Staphylococci
d. Tetracocci
e. Streptococci

73. Autopsy of the body of a 48-year-old man, who died 10 days after massive aspiration of gastric contents, detects a cavity approximately 5 cm in diameter in the upper lobe of the right lung. The cavity is filled with thick yellow-green masses that have an unpleasant sharp odor. The wall of the cavity is uneven, edematous, and covered with necrotic masses. Microscopically, the wall of the cavity is abundantly infiltrated by neutrophils and macrophages. What disease has been detected in the lung of the deceased man?
a. Bronchiectasis
*b. Acute pulmonary abscess
c. Pneumonia
d. Acute cavitary tuberculosis
e. Pulmonary gangrene

74. A tricuspid valve defect has been detected in a patient. Where is this valve located?
a. Opening of the pulmonary trunk
*b. Between the right atrium and right ventricle
c. Aortic opening
d. Opening of the coronary sinus
e. Between the left atrium and left ventricle

75. After eating salty food, the person presents with significantly decreased urine output. What hormone has caused this effect on the kidney function in this case?
a. Somatostatin
b. Adrenaline
c. Oxytocin
d. ACTH
*e. Antidiuretic hormone

76. A doctor has prescribed an anticholinesterase drug that lowers the intraocular pressure to a patient diagnosed with glaucoma. Select this drug from the list.
a. Noradrenaline hydrotartrate
*b. Neostigmine methylsulfate
c. Atropine sulfate
d. Lidocaine hydrochloride
e. Naloxone hydrochloride

77. After an injury, the patient cannot extend his arm at the elbow. What muscle is likely to be dysfunctional in this case, causing the patient's condition?
*a. M. triceps brachii
b. M. brachialis
c. M. subscapularis
d. M. biceps brachii
e. M. coracobrachialis

78. Autopsy of the body a 45-year-old woman reveals hypertrichosis, hirsutism, and striae on the skin of the thighs and abdomen. The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland has a tumor that has been microscopically identified as basophilic adenoma. The adrenal glands exhibit hyperplasia of the zona fasciculata. The deceased woman had history of upper-body obesity, steroid-induced diabetes, arterial hypertension, and secondary ovarian dysfunction. What disease has been detected in the deceased woman?
a. Pituitary dwarfism
b. Adiposogenital dystrophy
*c. Cushing disease
d. Cushing syndrome
e. Simmonds disease

79. A patient has been hospitalized to the infectious diseases unit of a hospital with signs of fever that occurred for the second time with the interval of two days between the two episodes. Blue-violet twisted cells were detected in the blood drop stained according to the Romanowsky-Giemza technique. What microorganism has caused the disease in this patient?
a. Rickettsia typhi
b. Treponema pallidum
*c. Borrelia recurrentis
d. Leptospira interrogans
e. Plasmodium vivax

80. Examination of a 7-year-old child detects clinical signs of Down's syndrome. What is the cause of this pathology?
a. Nondisjunction of sex chromosomes
b. Trisomy X
c. Trisomy 13
*d. Trisomy 21
e. Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 21

81. ECG of a 45-year-old woman shows that her P-Q interval is prolonged, with every second or third QRST complex missing. What cardiac conduction disorder is observed in this case?
a. Sinoauricular block
*b. Second-degree atrioventricular block
c. Intraventricular block
d. First-degree atrioventricular block
e. Complete atrioventricular block

82. Having sensed the harbingers of a bronchial asthma attack, the patient took orally several tablets at short intervals without the doctor's supervision. However, he noted a short-term improvement of his condition only after taking the first two tablets. Subsequent doses of the drug did not improve the patien's condition. What phenomenon has caused the decrease of the drug's effect?
*a. Tachyphylaxis
b. Tolerance
c. Cumulation
d. Idiosyncrasy
e. Dependence

83. A patient diagnosed with diabetes mellitus presents with increased levels of ketone bodies in the blood. From what compound are ketone bodies synthesized?
a. Butyryl-CoA
*b. Acetyl-CoA
c. Acyl-CoA
d. Oxyacyl-CoA
e. Succinyl-CoA

84. A histological specimen shows a gland with acini and islets. In the acini, the secretory cells have two zones: basal (homogeneous basophilic) and apical (zymogenic oxyphilic). What organ has such morphological features?
a. Liver
b. Sublingual salivary gland
c. Submandibular salivary gland
*d. Pancreas
e. Parotid salivary gland

85. A patient came to a doctor with an exacerbation of peptic ulcer disease of the stomach. What group of drugs should be used in this case as a component of the patient's complex therapy?
a. Histamine H_1 receptor blockers
b. beta-blockers
c. alpha-adrenergic agonists
*d. Histamine H_2 receptor blockers
e. alpha-blockers

86. A 1.5-year-old boy constantly suffers from pyoderma and had three cases of pneumonia. In his blood, there are reduced levels of immunoglobulins G and A and no plasma cells. What type of immunodeficiency has developed in the child?
*a. Bruton's hypogammaglobulinemia
b. -
c. Thymic hypoplasia
d. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
e. Louis-Bar syndrome

87. A blood serum test has detected antibodies to proteins gP120 and gP41 in a patient with signs of immunodeficiency. What infection does this result confirm in the patient?
a. TORCH
b. ECHO
*c. HIV
d. HTLV-1
e. HBV

88. As a result of uncontrolled intake of a vitamin supplement, a child developed anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hyperthermia, hemorrhages on the skin and mucosa, and signs of meningism. What supplement was the child taking?
*a. Retinol acetate
b. Cyanocobalamin
c. Thiamine
d. Tocopherol acetate
e. Nicotinamide

89. A 23-year-old patient has been hospitalized in a severe condition with a cerebrocranial injury. His breathing can be characterized by a long convulsive inhalation, interrupted by a short exhalation. What type of breathing is it?
a. Kussmaul breathing
*b. Apneic breathing
c. Biot breathing
d. Cheyne-Stokes breathing
e. Gasping

90. Most of the participants in Magellan's expedition to America died of vitamin deficiency. The disease manifested as general weakness, subcutaneous hemorrhages, tooth loss, and bleeding from the gums. What vitamin deficiency was it?
a. Rickets
b. Pellagra
c. Biermer's anemia
d. Polyneuritis
*e. Scurvy

91. What is the main function of the pentose-phosphate pathway in adipose tissue?
a. Production of ribose phosphates
b. Neutralization of xenobiotics
c. Energy generation
*d. Generation of NADPH2
e. Oxidation of glucose to end products

92. A 66-year-old man has been diagnosed with a malignant epithelial tumor originating from a medium-sized bronchus. What epithelium is the source of the tumor development?
a. Stratified non-keratinized epithelium
b. Pseudostratified transitional epithelium
*c. Pseudostratified ciliated epithelium
d. Unstratified prismatic epithelium
e. Stratified keratinized epithelium

93. A child with congenital malformations has been diagnosed with Cri-du-chat syndrome. What will be detected when studying the karyotype of this child?
a. Missing X chromosome
b. Trisomy Y
c. Trisomy X
d. Trisomy 21
*e. Deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5

94. Histology of a skin tumor detects adipose tissue particles of varying size, separated by irregular layers of connective tissue. What disease can be characterized by such pathological changes?
a. Papilloma
b. Hemangioma
c. Fibroma
d. Hygroma
*e. Lipoma

95. In a 12-year-old child, a viral infection is complicated by obstructive bronchitis. What pharmacological type of drugs should be prescribed in this case as inhalations to eliminate the bronchospasm?
a. Nicotinic agonists
b. beta_2-blockers
c. Muscarinic agonists
*d. beta_2-adrenergic agonists
e. Analeptics

96. A 32-year-old woman with history of myocarditis on ECG presents with a heart rhythm disorder (non-sinus rhythm). What cardiomyocytes are dysfunctional in this case?
a. Conducting cardiomyocytes of the bundle of His
*b. Pacemaker cells
c. Transitional conducting cardiomyocytes
d. Contractile cardiomyocytes
e. Conducting cardiomyocytes of the bundle branches of His

97. During examination by a pediatrician, multiple petechiae were detected on the skin of a 10-year-old child. The child has bleeding gums and low levels of vitamin C in urine. What process is impaired in this case?
*a. Collagen synthesis
b. Proteoglycan synthesis
c. Activation of hyaluronidase
d. Collagen breakdown
e. Proteoglycan breakdown

98. A 28-year-old woman has been hospitalized to the maternity ward. Due to the weakness of her labor activity, the obstetrician-gynecologist prescribed her an intravenous infusion of a drug that strengthens and increases the rate of uterine contractions, facilitating the progression of the labor. What is the main mechanism of action of this drug?
a. -
*b. Stimulation of oxytocin receptors
c. Serotonin receptor block
d. Calcium channel block
e. Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis

99. A woman periodically has arterial hypertension attacks, accompanied by headaches, palpitations, markedly excessive sweating, sharp pain in the epigastric region, and elevated glucose levels in her blood plasma. High levels of metanephrines were detected in blood plasma and urine. What neoplastic disorder is most likely to be characterized by these symptoms?
a. Thyroid adenoma
b. Parathyroid adenoma
c. Ovarian tumor
*d. Pheochromocytoma
e. Stomach cancer

100. Biopsy of the endometrium of a healthy woman, performed in the secretory phase of her menstrual cycle, detects polygonal cells rich in lipids and glycogen in the lamina propria of the mucosa. What are these cells?
a. Smooth myocytes
b. Fibroblasts
*c. Decidual cells
d. Endothelial cells of damaged vessels
e. Myofibroblasts

101. After undergoing treatment with a direct anticoagulant for thromboembolism, the patient developed signs of intestinal bleeding. What drug has caused the complication in this case?
a. Protamine sulfate
*b. Heparin sodium
c. Sodium chloride
d. Calcium dobesilate
e. Fibrinogen

102. After prolonged fasting, the patient developed tissue edema. What is the cause of this phenomenon?
a. Increased osmotic pressure of blood plasma
b. Increased oncotic blood pressure
c. Decreased hydrostatic blood pressure
*d. Decreased oncotic pressure of blood plasma
e. Decreased osmotic pressure of blood plasma

103. A person presents with decreased diuresis, hypernatremia, and hypokalemia. What hormone can cause such changes, if it is hypersecreted?
a. Vasopressin
b. Adrenaline
*c. Aldosterone
d. Parathormone
e. Atrial natriuretic factor

104. A patient, who had been taking prednisolone for a long time, experienced an exacerbation of the disease, decreased blood pressure, and weakness as a result of drug withdrawal. What has caused these symptoms?
a. ACTH hyperproduction
b. Drug sensitization
c. Drug cumulation
d. Drug tolerance
*e. Development of adrenocortical insufficiency

105. Cardiac arrest in diastole has occurred in a patient with severe water-salt metabolism disorder. What is the most likely mechanism of cardiac arrest in diastole?
a. Hypernatremia
b. Hyponatremia
c. Dehydration
d. Hypokalemia
*e. Hyperkalemia

106. A patient with alkaptonuria has signs of arthritis and ochronosis. What substance accumulates in the joints in this case, causing pain?
*a. Homogentisates
b. Urates
c. Phosphates
d. Oxalates
e. Carbonates

107. Autopsy of the body of a 40-year-old man reveals an acutely dilated lumen of the small intestine, overfilled with a large amount of watery colorless fluid, containing grayish lumps. The intestinal wall is edematous and there are numerous small punctate hemorrhages on the mucosa. What infectious disease can be characterized by these symptoms?
*a. Cholera
b. Amebiasis
c. Shigellosis
d. Typhoid fever
e. Salmonellosis

108. What cells of the renal endocrine complex are located under the endothelium in the walls of afferent and efferent arterioles and contain renin granules in their cytoplasm, which contributes to an increase in the blood pressure?
*a. Juxtaglomerular cells
b. Mesangial cells
c. Interstitial cells
d. Goormaghtigh cells
e. Macula densa cells

109. A microspecimen has been made from the puncture sample obtained from a patient's regional lymph node and stained according to the Romanowsky-Giemza technique. In this specimen, the doctor detects pale pink thin microorganisms with 12-14 uniform curls and sharp ends that were 10-13 mcm long. What infectious disease can be caused by the detected pathogen?
a. Relapsing fever
b. Leptospirosis
c. Leishmaniasis
*d. Syphilis
e. Trypanosomiasis

110. A patient has been diagnosed with mitral valve stenosis. What pathogenetic type of heart failure is it?
a. Heart failure due to myocardial hypertrophy
b. Volume overload-induced heart failure
c. Mixed form of heart failure
*d. Pressure overload-induced heart failure
e. Heart failure due to myocardial damage

111. A man with bronchial asthma has been taking prednisolone for a long time. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
a. Inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase activity
b. Blockade of leukotriene receptors
c. Blockade of histamine receptors
*d. Inhibition of phospholipase A_2 activity
e. Inhibition of cyclooxygenase activity

112. The study of the skin epithelium shows that it consists of several layers of cells. The epithelial cells in the outer layer have no nuclei. What type of epithelium is it?
*a. Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
b. Pseudostratified ciliated epithelium
c. Stratified cuboidal epithelium
d. Transitional epithelium
e. Non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium

113. Autopsy of the body of a 70-year-old patient, who died of heart failure, reveals deformed and narrowed coronary arteries. On section, the inner surface of the arteries is tubercular, while their walls are whitish, brittle, and have stony density. What stage of atherosclerosis has been detected in this case?
a. Lipoidosis
b. Ulceration
c. Liposclerosis
*d. Atherocalcinosis
e. Atheromatosis

114. A 35-year-old man came to a doctor complaining of pain in the area of his liver. The patient often eats undercooked fried fish. Very small brown helminth eggs with an oval operculum were detected in his feces. What helminthiasis is most likely in this case?
a. Paragonimiasis
b. Schistosomiasis
*c. Opisthorchiasis
d. Dicrocoeliasis
e. Fasciolosis

115. A patient has been diagnosed with hepatic cirrhosis, accompanied by ascites and general hemodynamic disorders. What liver damage syndrome occurs in this case?
a. Hepatocerebral syndrome
b. Hepatolienal syndrome
c. Hepatorenal syndrome
*d. Portal hypertension
e. Hepatocardiac syndrome

116. Fatty liver disease develops when the human body does not receive or does not produce enough lipotropic factors. What substance is a lipotropic one?
a. Cholesterol
b. Triacylglycerides
*c. Choline
d. Fatty acids
e. Riboflavin

117. One year after the resection of 2/3 of the stomach, the patient developed complaints of skin pallor, headaches, dizziness, and general weakness. Complete blood count: hemoglobin - 60 g/L, erythrocytes - 2.4·10^12/L. What is the cause of this pathological condition?
*a. Decreased secretion of Castle's intrinsic factor
b. Decreased folic acid levels
c. Increased folic acid levels
d. Decreased copper absorption
e. Increased secretion of Castle's intrinsic factor

118. The doctor added a mucolytic drug that depolymerizes mucoproteins to the complex therapy of a patient with bronchopneumonia accompanied by a debilitating cough. Select this drug from the list.
*a. Acetylcysteine
b. Metoprolol tartrate
c. Strophanthin
d. Codeine
e. Warfarin sodium

119. A 65-year-old patient has been hospitalized with complaints of heaviness in the subcostal regions, enlarged lymph nodes, general weakness, and headache. Examination reveals the following: hepatosplenomegaly, erythrocytes - 2.3·10^12/L, leukocytes - 90·10^9/L, lymphocytes - 75%, ESR - 35 mm/hour, numerous Gumprecht shadows in the smear prepared from the peripheral blood. What disease can be characterized by such a clinical presentation?
a. Acute lymphocytic leukemia
b. Acute myeloid leukemia
c. Chronic myeloid leukemia
*d. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
e. Iron deficiency anemia

120. As a result of radiation exposure, hematopoietic stem cells were damaged, impairing formation of certain connective tissue cells. Name these connective tissue cells.
a. Fibroblasts
b. Pericytes
c. Melanocytes
d. Adipocytes
*e. Macrophages

121. After exposure to a high dose of radiation, the lymphoid system of a teenager was significantly damaged and a large number of lymphocytes were destroyed. What gland can restore the normal blood count?
a. Thyroid gland
*b. Thymus
c. Adrenal glands
d. Pancreas
e. -

122. When determining who among the schoolchildren needs revaccination with BCG vaccine, one student had a negative result of the Mantoux test. What characteristic of tuberculosis immunity is indicated by this test result?
a. Presence of cell-mediated immunity to tuberculosis
b. Presence of humoral immunity to tuberculosis
c. No antitoxic immunity to tuberculosis
*d. No cell-mediated immunity to tuberculosis
e. No humoral immunity to tuberculosis

123. As a result of an injury, the integrity of the anterior root of the spinal cord has been impaired. What processes in what neurons are damaged in this case?
a. Axons of sensory neurons
b. Dendrites of interneurons
*c. Axons of motor neurons
d. Dendrites of motor neurons
e. Dendrites of sensory neurons

124. An electron micrograph of the wall of a pulmonary alveolus shows a large cell with many mitochondria in its cytoplasm, a developed Golgi complex, and osmiophilic lamellar bodies. What is the main function of this cell?
a. Being a component of the air-blood barrier
b. Air purification
*c. Surfactant production
d. Air warming
e. Microorganism absorption

125. A 12-year-old boy with bronchial asthma has developed a severe asthma attack with marked expiratory dyspnea and skin pallor. What type of alveolar ventilation disorder can be observed in this boy?
a. Restrictive
b. Thoraco-diaphragmatic
c. Neuromuscular
*d. Obstructive
e. Central

126. Histology of the lungs of a premature baby shows that the alveoli stick together due to the absence of the surfactant. This condition is associated with the underdevelopment of certain cells in the alveolar wall. Name these cells.
a. Alveolar macrophages
b. Fibroblast-like cells
c. Respiratory alveolar cells
d. Clara cells
*e. Secretory alveolar cells

127. After recovery from a case of viral infection, a 65-year-old woman with long history of aortic valve stenosis was hospitalized with signs of chronic cardiovascular failure: dyspnea, cyanosis, edema. What type of hypoxia is observed in the patient?
a. Hypoxic hypoxia
b. Respiratory hypoxia
c. Hemic hypoxia
*d. Circulatory hypoxia
e. Tissue hypoxia

128. What enzyme due to its bactericidal effect prevents inflammation of the oral mucosa, if it becomes damaged?
a. Mucin
*b. Lysozyme
c. Nuclease
d. Amylase
e. Lingual lipase

129. In an experiment, when modeling renal pathology, the test animal shows the following signs: edema, high proteinuria, hypoproteinemia, dysproteinemia, hyperlipidemia. What renal pathology can be characterized by these signs?
a. Acute diffuse glomerulonephritis
b. Chronic renal failure
c. Acute renal failure
*d. Nephrotic syndrome
e. Pyelonephritis

130. A patient with chronic heart failure developed hepatic cirrhosis with ascites and leg edema. What changes in the blood composition cause ascites in this patient?
a. Macroglobulinemia
b. Hypergammaglobulinemia
*c. Hypoalbuminemia
d. Hypocholesterolemia
e. Hypoprothrombinemia

131. A patient with ischemic heart disease did not inform his doctor of his bronchospasm attacks. The doctor prescribed him a drug that reduced the frequency of his angina pectoris attacks, but made his bronchospasm attacks more frequent. What drug was prescribed in this case?
a. Losartan potassium
*b. Propranolol hydrochloride
c. Glycerol trinitrate
d. Dobutamine hydrochloride
e. Atorvastatin calcium

132. As a result of an injury to her lower anterior abdominal wall, the patient's ligament located in the inguinal canal has been damaged. What ligament is it?
a. Ligamentum ovarium proprium
b. Ligamentum latum uteri
c. Ligamentum inguinale
d. Ligamentum lacunare
*e. Ligamentum teres uteri

133. What internal organ plays the largest role in humoral regulation of erythropoiesis?
a. Liver
b. Brain
c. Lungs
*d. Kidneys
e. Heart

134. During autopsy of the body of a 43-year-old man, who had ischemic heart disease and developing myocardial infarction, the pathologist revealed pulmonary edema. What pathological changes could have caused pulmonary edema?
*a. Acute left ventricular failure
b. Pulmonary circulation ischemia
c. Acute generalized anemia
d. Hemostasis
e. Acute right ventricular failure

135. A 57-year-old man has been hospitalized in a severe condition. Blood biochemistry test: blood pH - 7.53, arterial blood pCO_2 - 40 mm Hg, sodium bicarbonate - 33 mmol/L, base excess is +8 mmol/L. What type of acid-base imbalance is observed in this case?
a. Compensated non-gaseous acidosis
b. Compensated gaseos alkalosis
c. Compensated non-gaseous alkalosis
*d. Decompensated non-gaseous alkalosis
e. Decompensated non-gaseous acidosis

136. A patient with marked jaundice of his skin, sclera, and mucosa has dark beer-colored urine and light-colored feces. Direct bilirubin levels are elevated in the blood. Bilirubin has been detected in patient's urine. What type of jaundice is it?
a. Parenchymal jaundice
*b. Obstructive jaundice
c. Hemolytic jaundice
d. Conjugated jaundice
e. Excretory jaundice

137. A microspecimen of the heart demonstrates rectangular cells with a centrally located nucleus and well-developed myofibrils that are connected to each other with intercalated discs. What function is performed by these cells?
a. Protective function
b. Endocrine function
*c. Cardiac contractions
d. Impulse conduction
e. Regenerative function

138. A woman, who had several spontaneous miscarriages, is being examined at a maternity clinic. Based on her clinical and epidemiological history, she was provisionally diagnosed with chronic toxoplasmosis. What laboratory test would be most effective for the confirmation of this diagnosis?
a. Skin allergy test
b. Microscopy of a fecal smear
*c. Serological reaction
d. Microscopy of a vaginal smear
e. Microscopy of a blood smear

139. Anaerobic breakdown of glucose to lactic acid is regulated by enzymes. What enzyme is the main regulator of this process?
a. Aldolase
b. Lactate dehydrogenase
c. Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase
*d. Phosphofructokinase
e. Enolase

140. Submicroscopy of a cell shows that its cytoplasm contains many lysosomes, phagosomes, and pinocytotic vesicles. Other organelles are moderately developed. What function can such a cell perform?
*a. Phagocytosis
b. Synthesis of lipids
c. Deposition of calcium ions
d. Synthesis of polysaccharides
e. Reabsorption of sodium ions

141. Examination detects familial hypercholesterolemia in a teenager with xanthomatosis. In this pathology, levels of certain lipoproteins significantly increase in the blood. Name these lipoproteins.
a. Non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA)
b. High-density lipoproteins
c. Very-low-density lipoproteins
d. Chylomicrons
*e. Low-density lipoproteins

142. ECG of a 30-year-old man shows an area of abnormal contraction with an absent P wave, deformed QRS complex, and negative T wave that is inverted in relation to the QRS complex. What pathological condition is observed in the patient?
a. Sinus arrhythmia
b. Paroxysmal tachycardia
c. Atrioventricular extrasystole
d. Atrial extrasystole
*e. Ventricular extrasystole

143. In a 40-year-old man, testicular inflammation was complicated by hydrocele testis. A surgery is necessary. What testicular tunic would be the last to be dissected by the surgeon during the operation?
a. External spermatic fascia
*b. Parietal layer of the tunica vaginalis of the testicle
c. Tunica dartos
d. Cremaster muscle
e. Internal spermatic fascia

144. A 60-year-old man has been taking digoxin systematically. His condition initially improved, but then started deteriorating, as he developed bradycardia and arrhythmia. What phenomenon is the cause of this health condition?
*a. Drug cumulation
b. Allergy
c. Induction of hepatic microsomal enzymes and acceleration of drug metabolism
d. Tachyphylaxis
e. Decreased adrenoceptor sensitivity

145. Chest X-ray revealed thymic hypoplasia in a newborn child with seizure syndrome and a ventricular septal defect. What type of immunodeficiency can be suspected in the child?
a. Good's syndrome
*b. DiGeorge syndrome
c. Bruton's disease
d. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
e. Louis-Bar ataxia-telangiectasia

146. A patient is in a collaptoid state due to decreased peripheral vascular tone. What drug would be most effective in this situation?
a. Dobutamine hydrochloride
b. Losartan potassium
*c. Phenylephrine hydrochloride
d. Amlodipine besylate
e. Glycerol trinitrate

147. As a result of a punctate hemorrhage into the retina of the eye, the patient has lost the ability to see objects in the center of his vision field. Where in the retina has the hemorrhage occurred in this case?
a. Uvea
b. Ciliary part of the retina
*c. Macula lutea
d. Punctum caecum
e. Iris part of the retina

148. A 30-year-old patient developed a postoperative scar after appendectomy. What connective tissue cells primarily provide skin wound regeneration?
a. Tissue basophils
b. Melanocytes
*c. Fibroblasts
d. Adipocytes
e. Macrophages

149. After an industrial accident, a person was exposed to the toxic effect of potassium cyanide, which has caused the blockade of cytochrome oxidase. What pathological process has occurred as a result?
a. Circulatory hypoxia
b. Hemic hypoxia
c. Hypoxic hypoxia
d. Respiratory hypoxia
*e. Tissue hypoxia

150. Examination of a 49-year-old patient reveals a significantly prolonged clotting time, gastrointestinal bleeding, and subcutaneous hemorrhages. What vitamin is likely to be deficient in this case, causing these symptoms?
a. В_1
*b. K
c. РР
d. Е
e. Н

